PERFORMANCE 
MEASUREMENT
CFA® Program Curriculum
2025 • LEVEL III CORE • VOLUME 3
©2024 by CFA Institute. All rights reserved. This copyright covers material written 
expressly for this volume by the editor/s as well as the compilation itself. It does 
not cover the individual selections herein that first appeared elsewhere. Permission 
to reprint these has been obtained by CFA Institute for this edition only. Further 
reproductions by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and 
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems, must be arranged with 
the individual copyright holders noted.
CFA®, Chartered Financial Analyst®, AIMR-PPS®, and GIPS® are just a few of the 
trademarks owned by CFA Institute. To view a list of CFA Institute trademarks and the 
Guide for Use of CFA Institute Marks, please visit our website at www  .cfainstitute .org.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information 
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the 
publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. 
If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent pro -
fessional should be sought.
All trademarks, service marks, registered trademarks, and registered service marks 
are the property of their respective owners and are used herein for identification 
purposes only.
ISBN 978-1-961409-44-6 (paper)
ISBN 978-1-961409-56-9 (ebook)
May 2024
CONTENTS
How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum   vii
CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem (LES)   vii
Designing Your Personal Study Program   vii
Errata   viii
Other Feedback   viii
Performance Measurement
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation   3
Introduction   4
Performance Evaluation and Attribution   4
Performance Attribution   6
Return Attribution   9
A Simple Return Attribution Example   10
Equity Return Attribution—The Brinson–Hood–Beebower Model   11
Brinson–Fachler Model   15
Factor-Based and Fixed-Income Return Attribution   17
Fixed-Income Return Attribution   20
Risk Attribution   26
Return Attribution Analysis at Multiple Levels   29
Macro Attribution—An Example   29
Micro Attribution—An Example   31
Asset- and Liability-Based Benchmarks   35
Asset-Based Benchmarks   38
Benchmark Selection   40
Evaluating Benchmark Quality: Analysis Based on a Decomposition 
of Portfolio Holdings and Returns   43
Importance of Choosing the Correct Benchmark   45
Benchmarking Alternative Investments   46
Benchmarking Hedge Fund Investments   46
Benchmarking Real Estate Investments   47
Benchmarking Private Equity   48
Benchmarking Commodity Investments   49
Benchmarking Managed Derivatives   49
Benchmarking Distressed Securities   49
Performance Appraisal: Risk-Based Measures   50
Distinguishing Investment Skill from Luck   50
Appraisal Measures   51
Performance Appraisal: Capture Ratios and Drawdowns   56
Capture Ratios   56
Drawdown   59
Evaluation of Investment Manager Skill   65
Performance Attribution Analysis   65
Appraisal Measures   66
iv Contents
Sample Evaluation of Skill   67
Summary   69
References   71
Practice Problems   72
Solutions   77
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection   81
Introduction   81
A Framework for Investment Manager Search and Selection   82
Defining the Manager Universe   84
Type I and Type II Errors in Manager Selection   85
Qualitative Considerations in Type I and Type II Errors   86
Performance Implications of Type I and Type II Errors   86
Quantitative Elements of Manager Search and Selection   88
Style Analysis   88
Capture Ratios and Drawdowns in Manager Evaluation   91
The Manager’s Investment Philosophy   95
Investment Philosophy   96
Investment Personnel   99
Behavioral Biases among Investment Teams   100
The Manager’s Investment Decision-Making Process   102
Signal Creation (Idea Generation)   102
Signal Capture (Idea Implementation)   102
Portfolio Construction   103
Monitoring the Portfolio   104
Operational Due Diligence   104
Firm   106
Investment Vehicle   107
Separately Managed Accounts   108
Evaluation of the Investment’s Terms   109
Management Fees   110
Assets under Management Fees   112
Performance-Based Fees   112
Summary   117
References   120
Practice Problems   121
Solutions   133
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards   141
Objective and Scope of the GIPS Standards   142
Objective and Scope of the GIPS Standards   142
Fundamentals of Compliance   148
Definition of the Firm    148
Definition of Discretion   150
Other Fundamentals of Compliance    150
Time-Weighted Return   151
Time-Weighted Return    151
Miscellaneous Return Calculation Topics   156
v Contents
Annualizing Returns   157
Treatment of Cash Equivalents   157
Treatment of Expenses and Fees   157
Valuation Requirements   158
Composite Time-Weighted Return Calculations   159
Composite Time-Weighted Return Calculations   160
Composites: Qualifying Portfolios and Defining Investment Strategies   162
Composites—Defining Investment Strategies   164
Composites: Including and Excluding Portfolios   167
Presentation and Reporting Requirements for Composites   169
Minimum Years of Performance    170
Required Elements of a GIPS Composite Report   170
Portability   172
Sample Reports   173
Verification   175
Scope of Verification   176
Verification Process   176
Summary   179
Practice Problems   182
Solutions   187
Glossary   G-1

vii
How to Use the CFA 
Program Curriculum
The CFA® Program exams measure your mastery of the core knowledge, skills, and 
abilities required to succeed as an investment professional. These core competencies 
are the basis for the Candidate Body of Knowledge (CBOK™). The CBOK consists of 
four components:
A broad outline that lists the major CFA Program topic areas ( www  
.cfainstitute  .org/  programs/  cfa/ curriculum/  cbok/  cbok )
Topic area weights that indicate the relative exam weightings of the top-level 
topic areas ( www  .cfainstitute  .org/  en/ programs/  cfa/ curriculum )
Learning outcome statements (LOS) that advise candidates about the 
specific knowledge, skills, and abilities they should acquire from curricu -
lum content covering a topic area: LOS are provided at the beginning of 
each block of related content and the specific lesson that covers them. We 
encourage you to review the information about the LOS on our website 
(www  .cfainstitute  .org/  programs/  cfa/ curriculum/  study  -sessions ), including 
the descriptions of LOS “command words” on the candidate resources page 
at www  .cfainstitute  .org/ -/ media/  documents/  support/  programs/  cfa -and 
-cipm  -los -command  -words  .ashx .
The CFA Program curriculum that candidates receive access to upon exam 
registration
Therefore, the key to your success on the CFA exams is studying and understanding 
the CBOK. You can learn more about the CBOK on our website: www  .cfainstitute  
.org/  programs/  cfa/ curriculum/  cbok . 
The curriculum, including the practice questions, is the basis for all exam questions. 
The curriculum is selected or developed specifically to provide candidates with the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities reflected in the CBOK.
CFA INSTITUTE LEARNING ECOSYSTEM (LES)
Your exam registration fee includes access to the CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem 
(LES). This digital learning platform provides access, even offline, to all the curriculum 
content and practice questions. The LES is organized as a series of learning modules 
consisting of short online lessons and associated practice questions. This tool is your 
source for all study materials, including practice questions and mock exams. The LES 
is the primary method by which CFA Institute delivers your curriculum experience. 
Here, candidates will find additional practice questions to test their knowledge. Some 
questions in the LES provide a unique interactive experience.
DESIGNING YOUR PERSONAL STUDY PROGRAM
An orderly, systematic approach to exam preparation is critical. You should dedicate 
a consistent block of time every week to reading and studying. Review the LOS both 
before and after you study curriculum content to ensure you can demonstrate the 
How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum viii
knowledge, skills, and abilities described by the LOS and the assigned reading. Use 
the LOS as a self-check to track your progress and highlight areas of weakness for 
later review.
Successful candidates report an average of more than 300 hours preparing for each 
exam. Your preparation time will vary based on your prior education and experience, 
and you will likely spend more time on some topics than on others. 
ERRATA
The curriculum development process is rigorous and involves multiple rounds of 
reviews by content experts. Despite our efforts to produce a curriculum that is free of 
errors, in some instances, we must make corrections. Curriculum errata are periodically 
updated and posted by exam level and test date on the Curriculum Errata webpage 
(www  .cfainstitute  .org/  en/ programs/  submit  -errata ). If you believe you have found an 
error in the curriculum, you can submit your concerns through our curriculum errata 
reporting process found at the bottom of the Curriculum Errata webpage. 
OTHER FEEDBACK
Please send any comments or suggestions to info@ cfainstitute .org, and we will review 
your feedback thoughtfully. 
Performance 
Measurement

Portfolio Performance Evaluation
by Marc A. Wright, CFA, and Charles Mitchell Conover, CFA, CIPM.
Marc A. Wright, CFA, is at Russell Investments (USA). Charles Mitchell Conover, CFA, 
CIPM, is at the University of Richmond (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
explain the following components of portfolio evaluation and 
their interrelationships: performance measurement, performance 
attribution, and performance appraisal
describe attributes of an effective attribution process
contrast return attribution and risk attribution; contrast macro and 
micro return attribution
describe returns-based, holdings-based, and transactions-based 
performance attribution, including advantages and disadvantages of 
each
interpret the sources of portfolio returns using a specified attribution 
approach
interpret the output from fixed-income attribution analyses
discuss considerations in selecting a risk attribution approach
identify and interpret investment results attributable to the asset 
owner versus those attributable to the investment manager
discuss uses of liability-based benchmarks
describe types of asset-based benchmarks
discuss tests of benchmark quality
describe the impact of benchmark misspecification on attribution 
and appraisal analysis
describe problems that arise in benchmarking alternative 
investments
calculate and interpret the Sortino ratio, the appraisal ratio, upside/
downside capture ratios, maximum drawdown, and drawdown 
duration
describe limitations of appraisal measures and related metrics
evaluate the skill of an investment managerLEARNING MODULE
1
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 4
INTRODUCTION
Performance evaluation is one of the most critical areas of investment analysis. 
Performance results can be used to assess the quality of the investment approach and 
suggest changes that might improve it. They are also used to communicate the results 
of the investment process to other stakeholders and may even be used to compensate 
the investment managers. Therefore, it is of vital importance that practitioners who 
use these analyses understand how the results are generated. By gaining an under -
standing of the details of how these analyses work, practitioners will develop a greater 
understanding of the insights that might be gathered from the analysis and will also 
be cognizant of the limitations of those approaches, careful not to infer more than 
what is explicit or logically implicit in the results.
We will first consider the broad categories of performance measurement, attribu -
tion, and appraisal, differentiating between the three and explaining their interrela -
tionships. Next, we will provide practitioners with tools to evaluate the effectiveness 
of those analyses as we summarize various approaches to performance evaluation. 
We will cover returns-based, holdings-based, and transactions-based attribution, 
addressing the merits and shortcomings of each approach and providing guidance on 
how to properly interpret attribution results. Again, by reviewing how each approach 
generates its results, we reveal strengths and weaknesses of the individual attribution 
approaches.
Next, we will turn to the subject of benchmarks and performance appraisal ratios. 
We will review the long-standing tests of benchmark quality and differentiate market 
indexes from benchmarks. We will also review different ratios used in performance 
appraisal, considering the benefits and limitations of each approach.
Lastly, we will provide advice on using these tools to collectively evaluate the skill 
of investment managers. This advice relies heavily on understanding the analysis tools, 
the limitations of the approaches, the importance of data to the quality of the analysis, 
and the pitfalls to avoid when making recommendations.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND ATTRIBUTION
explain the following components of portfolio evaluation and 
their interrelationships: performance measurement, performance 
attribution, and performance appraisal
describe attributes of an effective attribution process
contrast return attribution and risk attribution; contrast macro and 
micro return attribution
describe returns-based, holdings-based, and transactions-based 
performance attribution, including advantages and disadvantages of 
each
Performance evaluation includes three primary components, each corresponding to 
a specific question we need to answer to evaluate a portfolio’s performance:
 ■Performance measurement—what was the portfolio’s performance?
 ■Performance attribution—how was the performance achieved?1
2
Performance Evaluation and Attribution 5
 ■Performance appraisal—was the performance achieved through manager 
skill or luck?
We will consider each of these components on their own and the interrelationships 
between them.
Performance measurement provides an overall indication of the portfolio’s perfor -
mance, typically relative to a benchmark. In its simplest form, performance measure -
ment is the calculation of investment returns for both the portfolio and its benchmark. 
This return calculation is a critical first step in the performance evaluation process, 
building the foundation on which performance evaluation is based. The investment 
return tells us what the portfolio achieved over a specific period, irrespective of peer 
or benchmark performance. For purposes of this reading, we will call this the abso -
lute return . But it also provides the basis to understand the difference between the 
portfolio return and its benchmark return, the excess return .
In addition to return, performance measurement must consider the risk incurred to 
achieve that return. We measure risk using a variety of ex post  (looking back in time) 
and ex ante  (looking forward in time) techniques. For ex post , we might consider the 
volatility or standard deviation of the past returns, along with many other performance 
appraisal ratios considered later in this reading. The calculation of a portfolio’s value 
at risk (VaR) at a point in time is an example of an ex ante  measure. These measures 
of risk allow us to quantify the risk in a portfolio and better assess the performance.
Performance attribution then builds on the foundation of the investment returns 
and risk, helping us explain how that performance was achieved or that risk was 
incurred. Performance attribution can be used to explain either absolute returns or 
relative returns. It can be used to understand what portion of returns was driven by 
active manager decisions and what portion was a result of exposures not specifically 
targeted by the portfolio manager. Performance attribution can also be used to decom -
pose the excess return into its component sources, where it is used to help explain why 
a manager over- or underperformed the target benchmark. Similarly, risk attribution 
can be used to decompose the risk incurred in the portfolio.
The third component of performance evaluation, performance appraisal, makes 
use of risk, return, and attribution analyses to draw conclusions regarding the quality  
of a portfolio’s performance. Performance appraisal attempts to distinguish manager 
skill from luck. Did the portfolio manager’s decisions help achieve a better outcome, or 
was the outcome due to market changes outside of the manager’s control? If superior 
results can be attributed to skill, there is a higher likelihood that the manager will 
generate superior performance in the future. The analysis may affirm the management 
process or may contain insights for improving the process. This is a key feedback loop 
in the investment management process.
EXAMPLE 1
Performance Evaluation
1. Performance attribution:
A. measures the excess performance of a portfolio.
B. explains the proportion of returns due to manager skill.
C. explains how the excess performance or risk was achieved.
Solution:
C is correct. Performance attribution identifies the drivers of investment re -
turns. A is not correct because measuring the excess performance of a port -
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 6
folio is the subject of performance measurement. B is not correct because it 
is performance appraisal that distinguishes skill from luck.
2. Performance appraisal:
A. identifies the sources of under- or outperformance.
B. decomposes a portfolio’s risk and return into their constituent parts.
C. uses the results of risk, return, and attribution analyses to assess the 
quality of a portfolio's performance.
Solution:
C is correct. Performance appraisal combines all the techniques of perfor -
mance measurement and attribution to assess the quality of performance. 
Both A and B describe performance attribution.
Performance Attribution
As previously described, performance attribution is a critical component of the portfolio 
evaluation process. Used by senior management, client relationship specialists, risk 
controllers, operations staff, portfolio managers, and sales and marketing professionals, 
attribution analysis provides important insights to the investment decision-making 
process. Clients and prospects also use attribution analysis as part of their evalua -
tion of that process. Effective performance attribution analysis requires a thorough 
understanding of the investment decision-making process and should reflect the active 
decisions of the portfolio manager.
An effective performance attribution process must
 ■account for all of the portfolio’s return or risk exposure,
 ■reflect the investment decision-making process,
 ■quantify the active decisions of the portfolio manager, and
 ■provide a complete understanding of the excess return/risk of the portfolio.
If the return or risk quantified by the attribution analysis does not account for all 
the return or risk presented to the client, then at best the attribution is incomplete and 
at worst the quality of the attribution analysis is brought into doubt. If the attribution 
does not reflect the investment decision-making process, then the analysis will be of 
little value to either the portfolio manager or the client. For example, if the portfolio 
manager is a genuine bottom-up stock picker who ignores sector benchmark weights, 
then measuring the impact of sector allocation against these weights is not measuring 
decisions made as part of the investment process; sector effects are merely a byproduct 
of the manager’s investment decisions.
Performance attribution  includes return attribution and risk attribution (although 
in practice, “performance attribution” is often used to mean “return attribution”). 
Return attribution  analyzes the impact of active investment decisions on returns ; 
risk attribution  analyzes the risk consequences of those decisions. Depending on the 
purpose of the analysis, risk may be viewed in absolute or benchmark-relative terms. 
For example, when risk relative to a benchmark is the focus, a risk attribution analysis 
might identify and evaluate a portfolio’s deviations from a benchmark’s exposures to 
risk factors.
Performance attribution provides a good starting point for a conversation with 
clients, explaining both positive and negative aspects of recent performance. Return 
attribution analysis is particularly important when performance is weak; portfolio 
managers must demonstrate an understanding of their performance, provide a rationale 
Performance Evaluation and Attribution 7
for their decisions, and generate confidence in their ability to add value in the future. 
When it accurately reflects the investment decision-making process, return attribution 
provides quality control for the investment process and provides senior management 
with a tool to manage a complex business with multiple investment strategies.
The attribution process described earlier—understanding the drivers of a man -
ager’s returns and whether those drivers are consistent with the stated investment 
process—is a common application of attribution analysis. But attribution can also be 
conducted to evaluate the asset owner’s tactical asset allocation and manager selec -
tion decisions (called macro attribution ) or to evaluate the impact of the portfolio 
manager’s decisions on the performance of the asset owner’s total fund (called micro 
attribution ). A defined-benefit pension plan makes the decision to allocate a given 
percentage of the fund to each asset class and decides which manager(s) to hire for 
each asset class. Macro attribution measures the effect of the sponsor’s choice to 
deviate from the strategic asset allocation, including the effect of “gaps” between the 
strategic asset allocation and its implementation (e.g., where the sum of the managers’ 
benchmarks is equal to something other than the benchmark index). 
Micro attribution measures the impact of portfolio managers’ allocation and 
selection decisions on total fund performance.
Performance attribution may be either returns based, holdings based, or transac -
tions based. The decision to use one set of inputs rather than another depends on the 
availability of data as well as the investment process being measured.
Returns-based attribution  uses only the total portfolio returns over a period to 
identify the components of the investment process that have generated the returns. 
Returns-based attribution is most appropriate when the underlying portfolio holding 
information is not available with sufficient frequency at the required level of detail. For 
example, one might use returns-based attribution to evaluate hedge funds, because it 
can be difficult to obtain the underlying holdings of hedge funds. Returns-based attri -
bution is the easiest method to implement, but because it does not use the underlying 
holdings, it is the least accurate of the three approaches and the most vulnerable to 
data manipulation.
Unlike returns-based attribution, holdings-based attribution  references the 
beginning-of-period holdings of the portfolio. Calculated with monthly, weekly, or 
daily data, the accuracy of holdings-based attribution improves when using data with 
shorter time intervals. For longer evaluation periods, we link together the attribution 
results for the shorter measurement periods. Because holdings-based attribution fails 
to capture the impact of any transactions made during the measurement period, it 
may not reconcile to the actual portfolio return. For example, in a daily holdings-based 
attribution, securities are included at the end of the day they are purchased and 
excluded at the end of the day they are sold. If the transaction price is significantly 
different from the closing price, the attribution analysis can differ significantly from 
the actual performance.
The residual caused by ignoring transactions might be described as a timing or 
trading effect. Holdings-based analysis is most appropriate for investment strategies 
with little turnover (e.g., passive strategies). Holdings-based analysis may be improved 
by valuing the portfolio with the same prices used to calculate the underlying bench -
mark index, removing one potential difference between the portfolio and benchmark 
returns that is not a management effect.
The third approach, transactions-based attribution , uses both the holdings of the 
portfolio and the transactions (purchases and sales) that occurred during the evalu -
ation period. For transaction-based attribution, both the weights and returns reflect 
all transactions  during the period, including transaction costs. Transaction-based 
attribution is the most accurate type of attribution analysis but also the most difficult 
and time-consuming to implement. To obtain meaningful results, the underlying data 
must be complete, accurate, and reconciled from period to period. Because all the 
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 8
data are available, the entire excess return can be quantified and explained. The return 
used in the attribution analysis will reconcile with the return presented to the client, 
and attribution analysis can be used as a diagnostic tool to identify errors.
The choice of attribution approach depends on the availability and quality of the 
underlying data, the reporting requirements for the client, and the complexity of the 
investment decision-making process.
EXAMPLE 2
Performance Attribution
1. Effective attribution analysis must:
A. use intraday transaction data.
B. reconcile to the total portfolio return or risk exposure.
C. measure the contribution of security and sector selection decisions.
Solution:
B is correct. An effective attribution process accounts for all of the port -
folio’s return or risk exposure. A is not correct; an attribution analysis is 
improved with intraday transaction data, but an effective attribution analysis 
can be produced with a returns- or holdings-based approach. C is not 
correct because an attribution process that measures the sector selection 
effects of a bottom-up stock-picker does not measure the effectiveness of 
the investment decision-making process.
2. Which of the following most accurately describes macro attribution?
A. Attribution analysis at the portfolio level
B. Attribution analysis of the fund sponsor decisions
C. Attribution analysis of asset allocation decisions
Solution:
B is correct. Macro attribution measures the effect of the sponsor’s choice to 
deviate from the strategic asset allocation and the sponsor’s manager selec -
tion decisions. A is not correct because attribution analysis at the portfolio 
level may be either macro attribution or micro attribution. C is not correct 
because macro attribution measures both asset allocation and manager 
selection decisions of the asset owner.
3. Risk attribution differs from return attribution in that it:
A. is not conducted relative to a benchmark.
B. quantifies the risk consequences of the investment decisions.
C. quantifies the investment decisions of the investment manager.
Solution:
B is correct. Risk attribution, unlike return attribution, attempts to quantify 
the risk consequences of the investment decisions. A is not correct because 
risk attribution may be conducted on either an absolute or a relative basis. C 
is not correct because risk attribution does not capture the return impact of 
a manager’s investment decisions.
Return Attribution 9
4. An analyst is most likely  to use returns-based attribution when:
A. the portfolio has a low turnover.
B. the holdings for the portfolio are not available.
C. she wants the analysis to be as accurate as possible.
Solution:
B is correct. Returns-based attribution is typically used when the holdings 
data are not available. Neither A nor C is correct because returns-based 
attribution is the least accurate of the three approaches.
RETURN ATTRIBUTION
interpret the sources of portfolio returns using a specified attribution 
approach
Return attribution allows us to look across a specific time horizon and identify which 
investment decisions have either added value to or detracted value from the portfolio, 
relative to its benchmark. As feedback to the portfolio management process, return 
attribution quantifies the active decisions of portfolio managers and informs man -
agement and clients. In this way, return attribution can be thought of as “backward 
looking” or ex post , meaning that it is used to evaluate the investment decisions for 
some historical time horizon.
Return attribution  is a set of techniques used to identify the sources of excess 
return of a portfolio against its benchmark, quantifying the consequences of active 
investment decisions.
Specific return attribution approaches have been designed to evaluate particular 
types of assets. In this section, we will consider two common approaches for equity 
attribution: Brinson–Fachler and factor-based attribution. We will also review the 
output and findings from a typical fixed-income attribution approach.
Practitioners may also encounter the concept of geometric attribution and arith -
metic attribution, two approaches to measuring attribution effects over longer periods. 
Arithmetic attribution  approaches are designed to explain the excess return , the 
arithmetic difference between the portfolio return, R, and its benchmark return, B.
When using an arithmetic attribution approach, the attribution effects will sum 
to the excess return. Arithmetic approaches are straightforward for a single period, 
for which there is no difference between the sum of the attribution effects and the 
excess return. However, when combining multiple periods, the sub-period attribution 
effects will not sum to the excess return. Because the excess return is calculated by 
geometrically  linking the sub-period returns, adjustments must be made to “smooth” 
the arithmetic  sub-period attribution effects over time. Multiple smoothing approaches 
exist in the industry, including algorithms suggested by David Cariño (1999)  and Jose 
Menchero (2000) .
Geometric attribution approaches extend the arithmetic approaches by attributing 
the geometric excess return ( G), as defined below:
  G =   1 + R _ 1 + B   − 1 =   R − B _ 1 + B   3
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 10
Note that the geometric excess return is simply the arithmetic excess return divided 
by the wealth ratio of the benchmark (1 plus the return on the benchmark during 
the period).
In a geometric attribution approach, the attribution effects will compound (mul -
tiply) together to total the geometric excess return. Because the attribution effects 
compound together to exactly equal the geometric excess return, the compounding 
works across multiple periods. Therefore, no smoothing is required to adjust the 
geometric attribution effects across multiple periods.
Practitioners typically choose arithmetic attribution approaches when they want to 
use the attribution analysis with non-practitioner clients or in marketing reports. With 
results that add up to the total excess return for all periods, arithmetic approaches are 
more intuitively understood. Geometric approaches tend to be limited to practitioners 
who understand the approach and who appreciate that they do not have to adjust the 
attribution effects over time.
A Simple Return Attribution Example
Suppose a portfolio’s return for the past year was 5.24% and the portfolio’s benchmark 
return for that same period was 3.24%. In this case, the portfolio achieved a positive 
arithmetic excess return of 2.00% (5.24% − 3.24% = 2.00%) over the past year.
To understand how the 2.00% was achieved, we apply return attribution. In this 
example, return attribution will quantify two typical sources of excess return: security 
selection  and asset allocation . Security selection answers the question, Was the return 
achieved by selecting securities that performed well relative to the benchmark or by 
avoiding benchmark securities that performed relatively poorly? Asset allocation 
answers the question, Was the return achieved by choosing to overweight an asset 
category (e.g., economic sector or currency) that outperformed the total benchmark 
or to underweight an asset category that underperformed the total benchmark? (The 
term “allocation” is used somewhat differently here. It is not measuring the plan spon -
sor’s asset allocation decision but, rather, the manager’s  decision to allocate among 
countries, sectors, or, in cases where the manager has a broad mandate, asset classes.)
Models of equity return attribution often attempt to separate the investment process 
into those two key decisions—selection and allocation—assigning each a magnitude 
and direction (plus or minus) for both decisions. For instance, for the portfolio refer -
enced previously, we might calculate the return attribution results shown in Exhibit 1 :
Exhibit 1: Total Portfolio Return Attribution Analysis (Time Period: Past 12 
Months)
Portfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
ReturnExcess 
ReturnAllocation 
Effect Selection Effect
5.24% 3.24% 2.00% −0.50% 2.50%
As we noted, the investment decisions generated a positive excess return of 200 basis 
points (bps) relative to the benchmark. We use the “return attribution analysis” to see 
how this 200 bps was generated. First, note that the negative  allocation effect indi -
cates that the allocation decisions over the past 12 months, whatever they were, had 
a negative impact on the total portfolio performance. They subtracted  50 bps from 
the excess return. In contrast, the positive  selection effect indicates that the security 
selection decisions—decisions to overweight or underweight securities relative to 
Return Attribution 11
their benchmark weights— added  250 bps to the excess return. Our return attribu -
tion analysis implies that the portfolio manager’s security selection decision was far 
superior to his or her asset allocation decision for the past 12 months.
Equity Return Attribution—The Brinson–Hood–Beebower 
Model
The foundations of return attribution were established in two articles, one written by 
Brinson and Fachler (1985)  and the other by Brinson, Hood, and Beebower (1986) . 
The Brinson–Fachler model is more widely used in performance attribution today, 
but we introduce the Brinson–Hood–Beebower (BHB) model first to lay an important 
foundation.
BHB is built on the assumption that the total portfolio and benchmark returns 
are calculated by summing the weights and returns of the sectors within the portfolio 
(Equation 1) and the benchmark (Equation 2):
 Portfolio return  R =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
   w  i    R  i     (1)
 Benchmark return  B =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
   W  i    B  i     (2)
where
 wi = weight of the ith sector in the portfolio
 Ri = return of the portfolio assets in the ith sector
 Wi = weight of the ith sector in the benchmark
 Bi = return of the benchmark in the ith sector
 n  = number of sectors or securities
The sum of the weights in both the portfolio and the benchmark must equal 100%. 
The presence of leverage would require a position with a negative weight (borrowings 
or short positions) to balance to 100%.
Attribution analysis quantifies each of the portfolio manager’s active decisions that 
explain the difference between the portfolio return, R, and the benchmark return, B. 
Note that for this example, we are concerned with only single-period, single-currency 
return attribution models.
Exhibit 2  provides data for a three-sector domestic equity portfolio, used to illus -
trate the BHB model.
Exhibit 2: BHB Model Illustration—Portfolio and Benchmark Data
SectorPortfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return
Energy 50% 50% 18% 10%
Health care 30% 20% −3% −2%
Financials 20% 30% 10% 12%
Total 100% 100% 10.1% 8.2%
 Total portfolio return R = (50% × 18%) + (30% × −3%) + (20% × 10%) = 10.1%
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 12
 Total benchmark return B = (50% × 10%) + (20% × −2%) + (30% × 12%) = 8.2%
Thus, the excess return is 1.9% (10.1% − 8.2% = 1.9%), or 190 bps.
 
We will use the weights and returns data shown in Exhibit 2  to calculate the basic 
attribution effects using the BHB model, including the allocation effect, the security 
selection effect, and the interaction effect. The allocation effect refers to the value 
the portfolio manager adds (or subtracts) by having portfolio sector weights that are 
different from the benchmark sector weights. A sector weight in the portfolio greater 
than the benchmark sector weight would be described as overweight , and a sector 
weight less than the benchmark sector weight would be described as underweight .
To calculate allocation, we first calculate the contribution to allocation ( Ai) for 
each sector. The contribution to allocation in the ith sector is equal to the portfolio’s 
sector weight minus the benchmark’s sector weight, times the benchmark sector return:
 Ai = (wi − Wi)Bi (3)
Using the data from Exhibit 2 , we calculate individual sector allocation effects as follows:
 ■Energy: (50% − 50%) × 10% = 0.0%
 ■Health care: (30% − 20%) × −2.0% = −0.2%
 ■Financials: (20% − 30%) × 12% = −1.2%
To find the total portfolio allocation effect, A, we sum the individual sector con -
tributions to allocation:
  A =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
   A  i     (4)
 Total allocation effect = 0.0% − 0.2% − 1.2% = −1.4%
We can then use the results to state the following conclusions:
 ■The portfolio weight in the energy sector is equal to the benchmark weight; 
therefore, there is no contribution to allocation in energy.
 ■In health care, the portfolio manager held a higher weight than the bench -
mark (30% versus 20%), but the sector underperformed the aggregate 
benchmark (−2.0% versus 8.2%). Therefore, the decision to overweight 
health care lowered the overall excess return; the contribution to allocation 
is −0.2%.
 ■In financials, the portfolio manager chose to underweight versus the bench -
mark (20% versus 30%). But because financials outperformed the aggregate 
benchmark (12% versus 8.2%), the decision to underweight financials also 
lowered the overall excess return; the contribution to allocation is −1.2%.
 ■Overall, the combined allocation effect for this portfolio was −1.4%, demon -
strating that the weighting decisions negatively contributed to the perfor -
mance of the portfolio.
The other attribution effect in the BHB model is security selection—the value the 
portfolio manager adds by holding individual securities or instruments within the 
sector in different-from-benchmark weights.
To calculate selection, we first calculate the contribution to selection ( Si) for each 
sector. The contribution to selection in the ith sector is equal to the benchmark sec -
tor weight times the portfolio’s sector return minus the benchmark’s sector return.
 Si = Wi(Ri − Bi) (5)
Using the data from Exhibit 2 , we calculate individual sector selection effects as follows:
 ■Energy: 50% × (18% − 10%) = 4.0%
Return Attribution 13
 ■Health care: 20% × (−3% − −2.0%) = −0.2%
 ■Financials: 30% × (10% − 12%) = −0.6%
To find the total portfolio selection effect, S, we sum the individual sector con -
tributions to selection:
  S =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
   S  i     (6)
 Total selection effect = 4.0% + −0.2% + −0.6% = 3.2%
We can use the results to state the following conclusions:
 ■The portfolio’s energy sector outperformed the benchmark’s energy sector 
by 800 bps (18% − 10%); 800 bps times the benchmark weight of 50% for this 
sector results in a 4.0% contribution to selection.
 ■The portfolio’s health care sector underperformed the benchmark’s health 
care sector by 100 bps [(−3%) − (−2%)]; 100 bps times the benchmark weight 
of 20% for this sector results in a contribution of −0.2%.
 ■The portfolio’s financials sector underperformed the benchmark’s financials 
sector by 200 bps (10% − 12%); 200 bps times the benchmark weight of 30% 
to this sector results in a contribution of −0.6%.
 ■Overall, the combined selection effect for this portfolio was 3.2%.
In the BHB model, selection and allocation do not completely explain the arithme -
tic difference. For example, in the attribution analysis based on Exhibit 2 , allocation 
(−1.4%) and selection (3.2%) together represent just 1.8% of the arithmetic difference 
between the portfolio return of 10.1% and the benchmark return of 8.2%; 0.1% is 
missing. To explain this remaining difference in the excess return, the BHB model 
uses a third attribution effect, called “interaction. ” The interaction effect  is the effect 
resulting from the interaction of the allocation and selection decisions combined.
To calculate interaction, we first calculate the contribution to interaction for each 
sector. The contribution to interaction in the ith sector is equal to the portfolio sector 
weight minus the benchmark sector weight, times the portfolio sector return minus 
the benchmark sector return:
 Ii = (wi − Wi)(Ri − Bi) (7)
Using the data from Exhibit 2 , we calculate individual sector selection effects as follows:
 ■Energy: (50% − 50%) × (18% − 10%) = 0.0%
 ■Health care: (30% − 20%) × (−3% − −2.0%) = −0.1%
 ■Financials: (20% − 30%) × (10% − 12%) = 0.2%
To find the total portfolio interaction effect, we sum the individual sector contri -
butions to interaction:
  I =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
   I  i     (8)
 Total interaction effect = 0.0% + −0.1% + 0.2% = 0.1%
We can use the results to state the following conclusions:
 ■For the energy sector, the portfolio weight equals the benchmark weight and 
thus there is no contribution to interaction.
 ■Because the manager had an overweight to a sector in which selection was 
negative, the contribution from interaction in health care was also negative, 
−0.1%.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 14
 ■In the financials sector, the manager was underweight by 10% and selection 
was negative. The effect of being underweight in a sector in which the man -
ager underperforms leads to a contribution from interaction of +0.2%.
 ■Total contribution from interaction is +0.1%, representing the combined 
effect of the interaction of the selection and allocation effects.
EXAMPLE 3
Interpreting the Results of a BHB Attribution
 
BHB Attribution Analysis Results Table
 
 
RegionPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
ReturnPortfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
Weight Allocation Selection Inter-action Total
Americas 2.80% 1.20% 30% 30% 0.00% 0.48% 0.00% 0.48%
APAC −1.50% −0.50% 20% 30% 0.05% −0.30% 0.10% −0.15%
EMEA 0.70% 1.50% 50% 40% 0.15% −0.32% −0.08% −0.25%
Total 0.89% 0.81% 100% 100% 0.20% −0.14% 0.02% 0.08%
 
Use the table above to answer the following questions.
1. Why is the contribution to selection for Europe, the Middle East, and Africa 
(EMEA) negative?
A. The total benchmark return is less than the total portfolio return.
B. The manager selected securities in EMEA that underperformed the 
benchmark.
C. The manager underweighted an outperforming sector.
Solution:
B is correct. The manager selected securities that underperformed the 
benchmark, with a portfolio return for EMEA of 0.7% versus a benchmark 
return for EMEA of 1.5%.
2. Why is the contribution to allocation for Asia Pacific (APAC) equal to +5 
bps?
A. The benchmark weight and the portfolio weight are equal.
B. The manager has an overweight position in an overperforming region.
C. The manager has an underweight position in an underperforming 
region.
Solution:
C is correct. The manager is underweight in APAC, 20% versus a benchmark 
weight of 30%. The APAC portion of the portfolio underperformed, with a 
−0.50% benchmark return versus the total benchmark return of 0.81%.
3. Which of the following conclusions from the above attribution analysis is 
most  correct?
A. The manager’s security selection decisions were better in the Americas 
than in APAC.
Return Attribution 15
B. The manager’s security selection decisions were better in EMEA than 
in APAC.
C. The manager’s allocation decisions were better in APAC than in 
EMEA.
Solution:
A is correct. As reflected in the contribution to selection, the manager’s se -
curity selection decisions were better in the Americas (0.48%) than in APAC 
(−0.30%).
4. Which of the following conclusions from the above attribution analysis is 
most  correct?
A. Overall, the manager made better allocation decisions than selection 
decisions.
B. Overall, the manager made better selection decisions than allocation 
decisions.
C. Contribution from interaction was most noticeable in the Americas.
Solution:
A is correct. Overall, the manager made better allocation decisions (0.20%) 
than selection decisions (−0.14%).
Brinson–Fachler Model
The Brinson–Fachler (BF) model differs from the BHB model only in how individual 
sector allocation effects are calculated.
In the BHB model, all overweight positions in sectors with positive returns will 
generate positive allocation effects irrespective of the overall benchmark return, 
whereas all overweight positions in negative markets will generate negative allocation 
effects. Thus, overweighting a sector i that earns a positive return, Bi > 0, results in 
a positive allocation effect, Ai = (wi − Wi)Bi > 0, even when the sector return is less 
than the overall benchmark return (i.e., Bi < B). When the sector return is negative, 0 
> Bi, overweighting produces a negative allocation effect, Ai = (wi − Wi)Bi < 0.
Clearly, if the portfolio manager is overweight in a negative market that has out -
performed the overall benchmark, the effect should be positive.
The BF model solves this problem by modifying the asset allocation factor to 
compare returns with the overall benchmark as follows:
   B  S   − B =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
     (   w  i   −  W  i   )     B  i    =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
     (   w  i   −  W  i   )       (   B  i   − B )       (9)
Because   ∑ 
i=1  i=n
   w  i   =  ∑ 
i=1  i=n
   W  i   = 1   , the constant B can be introduced. The contribution 
to asset allocation in the ith sector is now:
   A  i   =    (   w  i   −  W  i   )       (   B  i   − B )      (10)
Note that in Equation 10 , the allocation effect at the portfolio level, BS − B, is unchanged 
from the BHB model.
The contribution to arithmetic excess return from sector allocation for the port -
folio data shown in Exhibit 2  is BS − B = 6.8% − 8.2% = −1.4%. Revised BF sector 
allocation effects are calculated for the portfolio data in Exhibit 2  as follows, using 
Ai = (wi − Wi)(Bi − B):
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 16
Energy (50% − 50%) × (10% − 8.2%) = 0.0%
Health care (30% − 20%) × (−2.0% − 8.2%) = −1.02%
Financials (20% − 30%) × (12% − 8.2%) = −0.38%
Total 0.0% − 1.02% − 0.38% = −1.4%
The impact in health care is much greater. In addition to being overweight in a negative 
market, which costs −0.2%, the portfolio manager is correctly penalized the opportunity 
cost of not being invested in the overall market return of 8.2%, generating a further 
cost of 10% × −8.2% = −0.82% and resulting in a total impact of −1.02%. To describe 
it another way, the portfolio is 10% overweight in a market that is underperforming 
the overall market by −10.2% (i.e., −2.0% − 8.2%) and generating a loss of −1.02%
The impact in financials is much smaller. Although being underweight in a positive 
market cost −1.2%, we must add back the opportunity cost of being invested in the 
overall market return of 8.2%, generating a contribution of −10% × −8.2% = 0.82% 
and resulting in a total impact of −0.38%. To describe it another way, the portfolio 
is 10% underweight in an industry that is outperforming the overall market by 3.8% 
(i.e., 12.0% − 8.2%), generating a loss of −0.38%. As expected, at the portfolio level, the 
allocation effect of −1.4% remains the same as that calculated with the BHB model.
The revised attribution effects are summarized in Exhibit 3 . 
Exhibit 3: BF Return Attribution Results
 Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return Allocation Selection Interaction
Energy 50% 50% 18% 10% 0.0% 4.0% 0.0%
Health care 30% 20% −3% −2% −1.02% −0.2% −0.1%
Financials 20% 30% 10% 12% −0.38% −0.6% 0.2%
Total 100% 100% 10.1% 8.2% −1.4% 3.2% 0.1%
EXAMPLE 4
Allocation Using the BF Model
 
Exhibit 4: Sample Portfolio Data
 
 
 Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return
Technology 20% 30% −11.0% −10.0%
Telecommunications 30% 40% −5.0% −8.0%
Utilities 50% 30% −8.0% −5.0%
Total 100% 100% −7.7% −7.7%
 
1. Using the BF method, the allocation effect of utilities based on the portfolio 
data in Exhibit 4  is:
A. −1.50%.
B. 0.54%.
Factor-Based and Fixed-Income Return Attribution 17
C. 1.35%.
Solution: 
B is correct: ( wi − Wi)(Bi − B) = (50% − 30%)(−5.0% + 7.7%) = 0.54%. The 
portfolio is 20% overweight in a sector outperforming the overall bench -
mark by 2.7%, therefore contributing 0.54% to the overall allocation effect.
A is incorrect: WiBi = 30% × −5.0% = −1.5% is the contribution to the 
benchmark return from utilities.
C is incorrect: wi(Bi − B) = 50% × (−5.0% + 7.7%) = +1.35%. Only the portfo -
lio weight of 50% has been used, not the overweight position of 20%.
FACTOR-BASED AND FIXED-INCOME RETURN 
ATTRIBUTION
interpret the sources of portfolio returns using a specified attribution 
approach
interpret the output from fixed-income attribution analyses
As we have seen, return attribution allows us to analyze a portfolio’s excess return 
by comparing the accounting information (weights and returns) in the portfolio with 
the information in the benchmark. The Brinson–Fachler model focuses on security 
selection, asset allocation, and the interaction of selection and allocation. But what if 
we want to assess other decisions within the investment process?
Another type of return attribution uses fundamental factor models to decompose 
the contributions to excess return from factors . Fundamental factor analysis allows 
us to quantify the impact of specific active investment decisions within the portfo -
lio, showing how they add or remove value relative to the benchmark. We want to 
remove the effects of the market to identify the excess return generated by the active 
investment decisions. To do that, we return to our definition of excess return: Excess 
return = R − B.
Many different factor models can be used to decompose excess returns. The 
choice of factor model is driven by which aspects of the investment process you want 
to measure. One of the factor models commonly used in equity attribution analyses 
is the Carhart four-factor model, or simply the Carhart model , given in Equation 
11 (Carhart 1997 ). The Carhart model explains the excess return on the portfolio in 
terms of the portfolio’s sensitivity to a market index (RMRF), a market-capitalization 
factor (SMB), a book-value-to-price factor (HML), and a momentum factor (WML).
 Rp − Rf = ap + bp1RMRF + bp2SMB + bp3HML + bp4WML + Ep (11)4
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 18
where
 Rp and Rf = the return on the portfolio and the risk-free rate of return, respectively
 ap = “alpha” or return in excess of that expected given the portfolio’s level 
of systematic risk (assuming the four factors capture all systematic 
risk)
 bp = the sensitivity of the portfolio to the given factor
 RMRF = the return on a value-weighted equity index in excess of the 
one-month T-bill rate
 SMB = small minus big, a size (market-capitalization) factor (SMB is the 
average return on three small-cap portfolios minus the average return 
on three large-cap portfolios)
 HML = high minus low, a value factor (HML is the average return on two 
high-book-to-market portfolios minus the average return on two 
low-book-to-market portfolios)
 WML = winners minus losers, a momentum factor (WML is the return on a 
portfolio of the past year’s winners minus the return on a portfolio of 
the past year’s losers)
 Ep = an error term that represents the portion of the return to the portfolio, 
p, not explained by the model
By analyzing the results of a factor return attribution analysis, we can identify 
the investment approach and infer the relative strengths and/or weaknesses of the 
investment decisions. For example, using the Carhart factor model, we calculate the 
following results for a hypothetical manager.
Exhibit 5: Sample Carhart Factor Model Attribution
FactorFactor Sensitivity
Factor ReturnContribution to Active 
Return
Portfolio Benchmark Difference AbsoluteProportion of 
Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (3) × (4) Active
RMRF 0.95 1.00 −0.05 5.52% −0.28% −13.30%
SMB −1.05 −1.00 −0.05 −3.35% 0.17% 8.10%
HML 0.40 0.00 0.40 5.10% 2.04% 98.40%
WML 0.05 0.03 0.02 9.63% 0.19% 9.30%
      A. Factor tilts return = 2.12% 102.40%
      B. Security selection = −0.05% −2.40%
    C. Active return (A + B) = 2.07% 100.00%
This attribution analysis yields information about this portfolio’s investment approach, 
how the manager generated excess return, and his or her ability to consistently add 
value relative to the benchmark.
Factor-Based and Fixed-Income Return Attribution 19
Let’s first look at the analysis of the benchmark (column 2). The sensitivity to RMRF 
of 1 indicates that the assigned benchmark has average market risk, consistent with 
it being a broad-based index. The benchmark’s negative sensitivity to SMB indicates 
a large-cap orientation. Assuming, of course, that the benchmark is a good fit for the 
manager’s stated strategy, we can describe the approach as large cap without a value/
growth bias (HML is zero) or a momentum bias (WML is close to zero).
Let’s now look at where the portfolio manager’s approach differed from that of the 
benchmark. Based on the factor sensitivities shown in column 1 (positive sensitivity 
to HML of 0.40) and the differences relative to the benchmark shown in column 3, 
we can see that the manager likely had a value tilt but was otherwise relatively neutral 
to the benchmark. We would expect the portfolio to hold more value-oriented stocks 
than the benchmark, and we would want to evaluate the contribution of this tilt.
We can examine the effects of this decision by looking at the balance of the table. 
Positive active exposure to the HML factor—the bet on value stocks—contributed 
204 bps to the realized active return, about 98% of the 207 bps of total realized active 
return. The manager’s minor active exposures to small stocks and momentum also 
contributed positively to return, whereas the active exposure to RMRF was a drag 
on performance. However, because the magnitudes of the exposures to RMRF, SMB, 
and WML were relatively small, the effects of those bets were minor compared with 
the value tilt (HML).
What about the manager’s ability to contribute return through stock selection? 
Again, assuming that the benchmark is a good fit for the manager’s investment pro -
cess, the overall active return from security selection is the portion of return not 
explained by factor sensitivities. In this period, the contribution from selection was 
slightly negative (−0.05%).
In the aggregate, the manager’s positive active return was largely the result of the 
large active bet on HML (+0.40) and a high return to that factor during the period 
(+5.10%). Is this type of tilt consistent with the manager’s stated investment process? 
If yes, the manager can be credited with an active decision that contributed positively 
to return. If no, then the excess return in the period is unlikely to result from manager 
skill but, rather, is a byproduct of luck. What does the manager’s investment process 
say about the role of security selection? If the manager does not profess skill in secu -
rity selection but instead focuses on sector or factor allocation, then the minimal 
contribution of security selection should not be perceived as a negative reflection on 
manager skill.
EXAMPLE 5
Factor-Based Attribution
Use the data from Exhibit 5  to answer the following questions.
1. Which of the following statements is not correct?
A. The manager’s slight small-cap tilt contributed positively to return.
B. The manager’s slight momentum tilt contributed positively to return.
C. The manager’s below-benchmark beta contributed negatively to 
return.
Solution:
A is the correct answer. The negative coefficient on SMB indicates that the 
manager had a slight large-cap bias relative to the benchmark. The slight 
tilt on WML (+0.02) combined with a positive return to the factor resulted 
in a positive contribution to return. The below-benchmark beta of RMRF 
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 20
(−0.05) combined with a positive return to the factor resulted in a negative 
contribution to return.
2. What investment approach, not taken by the portfolio manager, could have 
delivered more value to the portfolio during the investment period?
A. A momentum-based approach
B. A growth-oriented approach
C. A small-cap-based approach
Solution:
A is correct. Had the manager overweighted momentum stocks during the 
period, the momentum factor (WML) return of 9.63% would have contrib -
uted significant positive performance to the portfolio.
Fixed-Income Return Attribution
Fixed-income portfolios are driven by decisions made with respect to credit risk 
and positioning along the yield curve. Building on work by Groupe de Reflexion en 
Attribution de Performance, or GRAP , outlined in Giguère (2005)  and Murira and 
Sierra (2006) , we will discuss three typical approaches to fixed-income attribution:
 ■Exposure decomposition—duration based
 ■Yield curve decomposition—duration based
 ■Yield curve decomposition—full repricing based
Candidates are not responsible for calculating  fixed-income attribution but should 
be able to interpret the results of a fixed-income attribution analysis.
Exposure Decomposition—Duration Based
Exposure decomposition is a top-down attribution approach that seeks to explain 
the active management of a portfolio relative to its benchmark, typically working 
through a hierarchy of decisions from the top to the bottom. These decisions might 
include portfolio duration bets, yield curve positioning or sector bets, each relative 
to the benchmark. The term “exposure decomposition” relates to the decomposition 
of portfolio risk exposures by means of grouping a portfolio’s component bonds by 
specified characteristics (e.g., duration, bond sector). The term “duration based” relates 
to the typical use of duration to represent interest rate exposure decisions.
Models that take an exposure decomposition approach are similar to Brinson-type 
equity attribution models, where we might group the portfolio by its market value 
weights in different economic sectors. In this case, however, we group the portfolio 
by its market value weights in duration buckets (i.e., exposure to different ranges of 
duration). This approach simplifies the data requirements and allows straightforward 
presentation of results relative to other fixed-income approaches. For these reasons, 
the exposure decomposition approach is used primarily for marketing and client 
reports, where an important benefit is that users can easily understand and articulate 
the results of active portfolio management.
Factor-Based and Fixed-Income Return Attribution 21
Yield Curve Decomposition—Duration Based
The duration-based yield curve decomposition approach to fixed-income attribu -
tion can be either executed as a top-down approach or built bottom-up from the 
security level. This approach estimates the return of securities, sector buckets, or 
years-to-maturity buckets using the known relationship between duration and changes 
in yield to maturity (YTM), as follows:
 % Total return = % Income return + % Price return,
where % Price return ≈ −Duration × Change in YTM.
Duration measures the sensitivity of bond price to a change in the bond’s yield 
to maturity. So, the percentage price return of a bond will be approximately equal to 
the negative of its duration for each 100 bp change in yields. The change in yield to 
maturity of the portfolio or instrument can be broken down into yield curve factors 
and spread factors to provide additional insights. These factors represent the changes 
in the risk-free government curve (e.g., changes in level, slope, and curvature) and in 
the premium required to hold riskier sectors and bonds. When they are combined and 
applied to the duration, we can determine a percentage price change for each factor.
For example, a manager may have a view as to how the yield curve factors will 
change over time. We can use the attribution analysis to determine the value of the 
yield curve views as they unfold over time.
This approach is applied to both the portfolio and the benchmark to identify 
contributions to total return from changes in the yield to maturity. Comparing the 
differences between the benchmark’s return drivers and the portfolio’s return drivers 
gives us the effect of active portfolio management decisions .
In this regard, this group of models is quite different from the exposure decom -
position. One consequence of this difference is that we require more data points to 
calculate the separate absolute attribution analyses for the portfolio and the bench -
mark. Thus, the yield decomposition approach exchanges better transparency for more 
operational complexity. These models are typically used when preparing reports for 
analysts and portfolio managers, rather than in marketing or client reports.
Yield Curve Decomposition—Full Repricing
Instead of estimating price changes from changes in duration and yields to maturity, 
bonds can be repriced from zero-coupon curves (spot rates). Recall that a bond’s 
price is the sum of its cash flows discounted at the appropriate spot rate for each cash 
flow’s maturity. The discount rate to compute the present value depends on the yields 
offered on the market for comparable securities and represents the required yield an 
investor expects for holding that investment. Typically, we discount each cash flow at 
a rate from the spot curve that corresponds to the time the cash flow will be received.
As with the duration-based approaches, instruments can be repriced following 
incremental changes in spot rates, whether resulting from changes in overall interest 
rates, spreads, or bond-specific factors. This bottom-up security-level repricing can 
then be translated into a contribution to a security’s return and aggregated for port -
folios, benchmarks, and active management.
This full repricing attribution approach provides more precise pricing and allows 
for a broader range of instrument types and yield changes. It also supports a greater 
variety of quantitative modeling beyond fixed-income attribution (e.g., ex ante  risk). 
This approach is better aligned with how portfolio managers typically view the instru -
ments. However, it requires the full capability to reprice all financial instruments in 
the portfolio and the benchmark, including the rates and the characteristics of the 
instrument. Its complex nature can make it more difficult and costly to administer 
operationally and can make the results more difficult to understand, particularly for 
non-fixed-income professionals.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 22
All three approaches can be applied to single-currency and multi-currency port -
folios. We can most clearly demonstrate the principles of fixed-income attribution by 
using a single-currency domestic portfolio, without digressing into the relative merits 
of the various multi-currency approaches. Therefore, this example is a single-currency 
example.
Fixed-Income Attribution—Worked Example
Let’s begin with an example of exposure decomposition analysis.
Exhibit 6  shows a breakdown of the portfolio and the benchmark by weights, dura -
tion, and each bucket’s contribution to duration, aggregated by sector and duration 
buckets. For this example, the short-, mid-, and long-duration buckets are defined 
as follows:1
Bucket Duration
Short Less than or equal to 5
Mid Greater than 5 and less than or equal to 10
Long Greater than 10
1 Note that the practitioner should take care when selecting the upper and lower bands of each duration 
bucket. By grouping bonds of different durations in the same bucket, one is measuring the combined impact 
of those bonds relative to the combined impact of similar bonds in the benchmark. In this example ( Exhibit 
6 and the related discussion), for instance, a bond with a duration of 5.5 is treated the same as a bond with 
a duration of 9.5 in terms of its relative impact on the portfolio versus its benchmark.
Factor-Based and Fixed-Income Return Attribution 23
Exhibit 6: Sample Exposure Decomposition: Relative Positions of Portfolio and Benchmark
 
Portfolio Weights Portfolio DurationPortfolio Contribution to 
Duration
  Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total
Government 10.00% 10.00% 20.00% 40.00% 4.42 7.47 10.21 8.08 0.44 0.75 2.04 3.23
Corporate 10.00% 20.00% 30.00% 60.00% 4.40 7.40 10.06 8.23 0.44 1.48 3.02 4.94
Total 20.00% 30.00% 50.00% 100.00% 4.41 7.42 10.12 8.17 0.88 2.23 5.06 8.17
 
Benchmark Weights Benchmark DurationBenchmark Contribution to 
Duration
  Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total
Government 20.00% 20.00% 15.00% 55.00% 4.42 7.47 10.21 7.11 0.88 1.49 1.53 3.91
Corporate 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 45.00% 4.40 7.40 10.06 7.29 0.66 1.11 1.51 3.28
Total 35.00% 35.00% 30.00% 100.00% 4.41 7.44 10.14 7.19 1.54 2.60 3.04 7.19
  Portfolio Weights Portfolio Returns Portfolio Contribution to Return
  Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total
Government 10.00% 10.00% 20.00% 40.00% −3.48% −5.16% −4.38% −4.35% −0.35% −0.52% −0.88% −1.74%
Corporate 10.00% 20.00% 30.00% 60.00% −4.33% −6.14% −5.42% −5.48% −0.43% −1.23% −1.63% −3.29%
Total 20.00% 30.00% 50.00% 100.00% −3.91% −5.81% −5.00% −5.03% −0.78% −1.74% −2.50% −5.03%
 
Benchmark Weights Benchmark ReturnsBenchmark Contribution to 
Return
  Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total Short Mid Long Total
Government 20.00% 20.00% 15.00% 55.00% −3.48% −5.16% −4.38% −4.34% −0.70% −1.03% −0.66% −2.39%
Corporate 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 45.00% −4.33% −6.14% −5.86% −5.44% −0.65% −0.92% −0.88% −2.45%
Total 35.00% 35.00% 30.00% 100.00% −3.84% −5.58% −5.12% −4.83% −1.35% −1.95% −1.54% −4.83%
From Exhibit 6 , we can make the following inferences regarding the manager’s invest -
ment decisions:
 ■With a higher duration than the benchmark (8.17 compared with 7.19 for 
the benchmark), the manager likely expected the rates to fall and took a 
bullish position on long-term bonds (interest rates) by increasing exposure 
to the long end of the interest rate curve (e.g., investing 50% of the portfolio 
in the longest-duration bucket versus 30% for the benchmark).
 ■Based on the overweight in the corporate sector (60% versus the 45% bench -
mark weight), the manager likely expected credit spreads to narrow.2 Notice 
that this bet increases the 4.94 contribution to duration of the corporate 
sector in the portfolio compared with the 3.28 contribution to duration for 
the benchmark. This allocation makes the portfolio more exposed to market 
yield fluctuations in the corporate sector.
2 If corporate yields were at a historically large spread with respect to governments, the overweight to 
corporates might also have been a yield bet. Even if spreads do not narrow, the higher-yielding corporates 
are likely to outperform the government bonds in the portfolio.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 24
 ■The total portfolio return is −5.03%, relative to a total benchmark return of 
−4.83%, showing an underperformance of −0.20% over the period.
We can then use the portfolio and benchmark information from Exhibit 6  to calcu -
late the portfolio’s attribution results. These results are summarized in Exhibit 7 . (Note 
that candidates are expected to be able to interpret, but not calculate, these results.)
Total interest rate allocation is the contribution from active management resulting 
from the manager’s active exposures to changes in the level and shape of the yield 
curve. This can be decomposed into the duration effect (the contribution to active 
management from taking a different-from-benchmark aggregate duration position) 
and the curve effect (the specific points along the yield curve at which the manager 
made his benchmark-relative duration bets).
Sector allocation measures the effect of the manager’s decision to overweight 
corporate bonds, whereas the selection effect measures the impact of the manager’s 
decision to hold non-benchmark bonds in the portfolio. The hypothetical portfolio 
underlying this example contains only one bond that is not in the benchmark—a 
long-duration corporate bond, Corp. (P). Accordingly, there is no selection effect in 
the other duration buckets.
Exhibit 7: Sample Exposure Decomposition: Attribution Results
Duration 
Bucket SectorDuration 
EffectCurve 
EffectTotal Inter -
est Rate 
AllocationSector 
AllocationBond 
Selection Total
Short Government         0.00% 0.00%
  Corporate       0.04% 0.00% 0.04%
  Total 0.40% 0.12% 0.52% 0.04% 0.00% 0.56%
Mid Government         0.00% 0.00%
  Corporate       −0.05% 0.00% −0.05%
  Total 0.23% 0.03% 0.26% −0.05% 0.00% 0.21%
Long Government         0.00% 0.00%
  Corporate       −0.22% 0.13% −0.09%
  Total −1.25% 0.37% −0.88% −0.22% 0.13% −0.97%
Total   −0.62% 0.52% −0.10% −0.23% 0.13% −0.20%
Using the results from Exhibit 7 , we can draw the following conclusions about the 
investment decisions made by this manager:
 ■The portfolio underperformed its benchmark by 20 bps.
 ■62 bps were lost by taking a long-duration position during a period when 
yields increased (benchmark returns were negative in each duration bucket).
 ■52 bps were gained as a result of changes in the shape of the yield curve. 
Given the manager’s overweighting in the long-duration bucket, we can 
infer that the yield curve flattened.
 ■23 bps were lost because the manager overweighted the corporate sector 
during a period when credit spreads widened (the benchmark corporate 
returns in each duration bucket were less than the government returns in 
those same duration buckets).
 ■7 bps were added through bond selection.
Factor-Based and Fixed-Income Return Attribution 25
Exhibit 8  provides an example of a sample duration-based yield curve decompo -
sition attribution analysis. Again, we do not include the calculations for this analysis 
but instead present the results and suggested interpretations.
Exhibit 8: Yield Curve Decomposition—Duration Based: Active Return Contribution
Bond Yield Roll Shift Slope Curvature Spread Specific Residual Total
Gov’t. 5% 30 June 21 −0.19% −0.04% 0.43% 0.01% 0.15% 0.00% 0.00% −0.01% 0.35%
Gov’t. 7% 30 June 26 −0.22% −0.03% 0.71% 0.04% 0.04% 0.00% 0.00% −0.03% 0.52%
Gov’t. 6% 30 June 31 0.12% 0.01% −0.48% 0.05% 0.09% 0.00% 0.00% −0.01% −0.22%
Corp. 5% 30 June 21 −0.11% −0.02% 0.21% 0.05% 0.05% 0.04% 0.02% −0.02% 0.22%
Corp. 7% 30 June 26 0.12% 0.01% −0.35% −0.02% −0.02% −0.07% 0.00% 0.02% −0.31%
Corp. (B) 6% 30 June 31 −0.39% −0.03% 1.41% −0.26% −0.11% 0.30% 0.00% −0.04% 0.88%
Corp. (P) 6% 30 June 31 0.78% 0.06% −2.82% 0.52% 0.33% −0.60% 0.15% −0.05% −1.63%
Total 0.11% −0.04% −0.89% 0.39% 0.53% −0.33% 0.17% −0.14% −0.20%
  Time: 0.08% Curve Movement: 0.03%        
Note:  There may be minor differences due to rounding in this table.
Using the data from Exhibit 6  and Exhibit 8 , we can infer the following about the 
portfolio investment process over this period:
 ■Yield : The portfolio overweighted corporate bonds and longer-term matur -
ities relative to the benchmark (from Exhibit 6 ), which generally offer higher 
yield than government bonds and short-term maturities. This decision con -
tributed 11 bps to the excess return (from Exhibit 8 ).
 ■Roll: The portfolio overweighted longer maturities (from Exhibit 6 ). Because 
of the shape of the yield curve, bonds with longer maturities generally sit on 
a flatter part of the yield curve, where the roll return is limited. The over -
weighting of the longer maturities reduced the portfolio roll return by 4 bps.
 ■Shift : The portfolio overall duration of 8.17 is greater than the benchmark 
duration of 7.19 (from Exhibit 6 ), which reduced the portfolio return by 89 
bps.
 ■Slope : The slope flattening caused the long-term yields to increase less than 
yields on shorter terms to maturity. The overweight at the long end of the 
curve contributed 39 bps to the excess return.
 ■Curvature : The reshaping of the yield curve resulted in a larger yield 
increase at the five-year maturity point. The manager underweighted that 
part of the yield curve. This decision contributed 53 bps to the excess 
return.
 ■Spread : The manager overweighted the corporate sector, which resulted in a 
33 bp reduction in return because corporate spreads widened.
 ■Specific spread : Looking at the bond-specific spreads in Exhibit 8 , the corpo -
rate 5% 30 June 2021 bond added 2 bps of selection return and the corporate 
(P) 6% 30 June 2031 bond added 15 bps of selection return. These decisions 
added a total of 17 bps to active return.
 ■Residual : A residual of −0.14% is unaccounted for because duration and 
convexity can only estimate  the percentage price variation. It is not an accu -
rate measure of the true price variation. The residual becomes more import -
ant during large yield moves, which is the case here, with a +1% yield shift.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 26
EXAMPLE 6
Fixed-Income Return Attribution
Use the data in Exhibit 7  and Exhibit 8  to answer the following questions.
1. Which decision had the most positive effect on the overall performance of 
the portfolio?
A. Taking a long-duration position
B. Security selection of bond issues
C. Overweighting the long end of the yield curve
Solution:
C is correct: 52 bps were gained by overweighting the long end of the yield 
curve during a period when the slope of the yield curve flattened.
2. Explain the contribution of the long-duration bucket to overall portfolio 
performance.
Solution:
The long-duration bucket cost the portfolio 97 bps of relative return. From 
Exhibit 7 , the curve and selection effects were positive (37 bps and 7 bps, re -
spectively) whereas the duration and sector allocation effects were negative 
(−125 bps and −16 bps, respectively). The negative duration effect indicates 
that the manager took a longer-than-benchmark-duration position in the 
long-duration bucket, a decision that hurt performance because interest 
rates rose. The positive curve effect implies that the manager’s specific 
positioning along the long end of the yield curve benefited from changes 
in the shape of the yield curve. This implication is further supported by 
the positive slope effect shown in Exhibit 8 . Taken together, the duration 
and curve effects accounted for the majority of the manager’s underperfor -
mance relative to the benchmark. In the long-duration bucket, the manager 
overweighted corporate bonds relative to the benchmark. This decision 
penalized returns because credit spreads widened, which can be inferred 
from the weaker performance of the long-duration corporate segment of 
the benchmark (−5.42%) relative to the long-duration government segment 
(−4.38%). The positive selection effect of 7 bps implies that the manager’s 
specific bond selections added to return. This implication is supported by 
the specific spread contribution reflected in Exhibit 8 .
RISK ATTRIBUTION
discuss considerations in selecting a risk attribution approach
Performance attribution, on its own, is typically insufficient to evaluate the investment 
process. In addition to performance, we need to understand the impact of exposure 
to risk by including risk attribution.5
Risk Attribution 27
Risk attribution identifies the sources of risk in the investment process. For abso -
lute mandates, it identifies the sources of portfolio volatility. For benchmark-relative 
mandates, it identifies the sources of tracking risk. Managers seek opportunities for 
profit by taking specific exposures to risk (e.g., portfolio volatility or tracking risk). 
Risk attribution identifies these risks taken and, together with return attribution, 
quantifies the contributions to both the return and risk of the investment manager’s 
active decisions.
Risk attribution should reflect the investment decision-making process. Exhibit 
9 classifies investment decision-making processes and suggests appropriate risk 
attribution approaches. The columns indicate whether the focus is absolute risk or 
benchmark-relative risk. The rows categorize investment decision-making processes 
as bottom up, top down, or factor based. A bottom-up approach focuses on individ -
ual security selection. Top-down approaches focus first on macro decisions, such 
as allocations to economic sectors, and then on security selection within sectors. A 
factor-based approach looks for profits by taking different-from-benchmark exposures 
to the risk factors believed to drive asset returns.
Exhibit 9: Selecting the Appropriate Risk Attribution Approach
Investment Deci -
sion-Making ProcessType of Attribution Analysis
Relative (vs. Benchmark) Absolute
Bottom up Position’s marginal contribution 
to tracking riskPosition’s marginal contribu -
tion to total risk
Top down Attribute tracking risk to relative 
allocation and selection decisions
Factor’s marginal contribution 
to total risk and specific riskFactor based Factor’s marginal contribution to 
tracking risk and active specific 
risk
For portfolios that are managed against benchmarks, a common measure of risk is 
tracking risk (TR), also often called tracking error. The objective of an attribution model 
for a benchmark-relative portfolio is to quantify the contribution of active decisions to 
TR. For bottom-up benchmark-relative investment processes, each position’s marginal 
contribution to TR multiplied by its active weight gives the position’s contribution 
to TR. For benchmark-relative top-down investment processes, the active return is 
explained first by the allocation decisions. Risk attribution, accordingly, will identify 
the total contribution of allocation and selection to TR.
For absolute mandates, the risk of the portfolio is explained by exposures to the 
market, size and style factors, and the specific risk due to stock selections. The attribu -
tion model quantifies the contribution of each exposure and of specific risk. Suppose 
that the manager follows an absolute bottom-up process where the measure of risk 
is the volatility (standard deviation) of returns. In this case, we want to measure the 
contribution of selection decisions to overall portfolio risk. To do this, we need to 
know the marginal contribution of each asset to the portfolio risk—the increase or 
decrease in the portfolio standard deviation due to a slight increase in the holding of 
that asset. If we know the marginal contribution of a security to absolute portfolio 
risk, we can then calculate the overall risk contribution of the portfolio manager’s 
selection decisions.
In all cases, risk attribution explains only where risk was introduced into the port -
folio. It needs to be combined with return attribution to understand the full impact of 
those decisions. For example, if a manager has added to excess return through asset 
allocation (e.g., positive return attribution allocation effect), we use risk attribution to 
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 28
understand whether those allocation decisions introduced additional risk. As such, risk 
attribution complements the return attribution by evaluating the risk consequences 
of the investment decisions.
EXAMPLE 7
Risk Attribution
Manager A is a market-neutral manager following a systematic investment 
approach, scoring each security on a proprietary set of risk factors. He seeks to 
maximize the portfolio score on the basis of the factor characteristics of indi -
vidual securities. He has a hurdle rate of T-bills plus 5%.
Manager B has a strong fundamental process based on a comprehensive 
understanding of the business model and competitive advantages of each firm. 
He also uses sophisticated models to make explicit three-year forecasts of the 
growth of free cash flow to determine the attractiveness of each security’s current 
valuation. His objective is to outperform the MSCI World ex-US Index by 200 bps.
Manager C specializes in timing sector exposure and generally avoids idiosyn -
cratic risks within sectors. Using technical analyses and econometric methodol -
ogies, she produces several types of forecasts. The manager uses this information 
to determine appropriate sector weights. The risk contribution from any single 
sector is limited to 30% of total portfolio risk. She hedges aggregate market risk 
and seeks to earn T-bills plus 300 bps.
1. Which risk attribution approach is most appropriate to evaluate Manager 
A?
A. Marginal contribution to total risk
B. Marginal contribution to tracking risk
C. Factor’s marginal contributions to total risk and specific risk
Solution:
A is correct. Manager A is a bottom-up manager with an absolute return 
target. B is incorrect because tracking risk is not relevant to an absolute re -
turn mandate. C is incorrect because, as a market-neutral manager, Manager 
A is not seeking to take different-from-market exposures.
2. Which risk attribution approach is most appropriate to evaluate Manager B?
A. Marginal contribution to total risk
B. Marginal contribution to tracking risk
C. Factor’s marginal contributions to total risk and specific risk
Solution:
B is correct. Manager B is a bottom-up manager with a relative return 
target. A and C are incorrect because they are best suited to absolute return 
mandates.
3. Which risk attribution approach is most appropriate to evaluate Manager 
C?
A. Marginal contribution to total risk
B. Marginal contribution to tracking risk
C. Factor’s marginal contributions to total risk and specific risk
Return Attribution Analysis at Multiple Levels 29
Solution:
C is correct. Manager C is a top-down manager with an absolute return 
target. A factor-based attribution is best suited to evaluate the effectiveness 
of the manager’s sector decisions and hedging of market risk.
RETURN ATTRIBUTION ANALYSIS AT MULTIPLE 
LEVELS
identify and interpret investment results attributable to the asset 
owner versus those attributable to the investment manager
To this point, the return attribution presented in the Brinson examples focused on the 
bottom-up approach, where we calculated attribution effects at security and sector 
levels and summed those effects to determine their impact at the total portfolio and 
fund levels. We can use a similar return attribution approach at multiple levels of the 
decision process to evaluate the impact of different decisions.
Macro Attribution—An Example
Consider an example in which the top level is the fund sponsor (e.g., a university 
endowment or a defined-benefit pension plan sponsor). At the fund sponsor level, the 
first decision might be to allocate a certain weight to asset classes—the strategic asset 
allocation. If the fund sponsor does not manage funds internally, it would delegate 
a second investment decision to the investment managers to decide on any tactical 
deviations from the strategic asset allocation. The sponsor might also select multiple 
portfolio managers to manage against specific mandates within a given asset class.
The attribution analysis that we use to determine the impact of these fund sponsor 
decisions is sometimes called macro attribution. The attribution of the individual 
portfolio manager decisions is sometimes called micro attribution.
Assume our hypothetical fund sponsor has the following total equity benchmark:
 ■50% large-cap value equities
 ■25% small-cap value equities
 ■25% large-cap growth equities
The fund sponsor hires two investment managers to manage the equity portion 
of the fund. Value Portfolio Manager manages the large-cap and small-cap value 
allocations, and Growth Portfolio Manager manages the growth equity allocation. 
The investment returns are shown in Exhibit 10 .
Exhibit 10: Performance of Value and Growth Equity Managers
 Fund 
Weight Fund ReturnBenchmark 
WeightBenchmark 
Return
Total 100% 0.95 100% −0.03
Value Portfolio Manager 78% 0.99 75% 0.326
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 30
 Fund 
Weight Fund ReturnBenchmark 
WeightBenchmark 
Return
Small-cap value equities 20% 2.39 25% 1.52
Large-cap value equities 58% 0.51 50% −0.28
Growth Portfolio 
Manager22% 0.82 25% −1.08
Large-cap growth equities 22% 0.82 25% −1.08
To evaluate the decisions of the fund sponsor, we perform a return Brinson–Fachler 
attribution analysis using the set of weight and return data in Exhibit 10 . “ Allocation” 
measures the tactical asset allocation decision of the sponsor against its own strategic 
benchmark. In this example, the fund sponsor overweighted value equities and under -
weighted growth equities. “Selection” measures the fund sponsor’s manager selection 
decision: Did the selected managers add value relative to their assigned benchmarks?
For the decision to hire the Value Portfolio Manager, we would calculate the 
effects as follows:
 Allocation = (78% − 75%)[0.32 − (−0.03)] = 0.01
 ■The fund sponsor overweighted value equities (78% − 75%).
 ■Value equities outperformed the fund’s aggregate benchmark [0.32 
− (−0.03)].
 ■The decision to overweight value equities added to portfolio return.
 Selection + Interaction = [(75%)(0.99 − 0.32)] + [(78% − 75%)(0.99 − 0.32)] 
 = 0.52
 ■The value manager outperformed the value benchmark (0.99 − 0.32). Thus, 
the fund sponsor’s manager selection decision, independent of the decision 
to overweight value equities, added value.
 ■The fund sponsor overweighted a manager who outperformed his bench -
mark [(78% − 75%)(0.99 − 0.32)]. This is the interaction effect. (For simplic -
ity, we combine interaction with selection, rather than showing interaction 
separately. By combining with selection, we assume that the selection deci -
sions include the interaction and leave the allocation decision separate.) The 
interaction effect was positive.
For the decision to hire the Growth Portfolio Manager, we would calculate the 
effects as follows:
 Allocation = (22% − 25%)[−1.08 − (−0.03)] = 0.03
 ■The fund sponsor underweighted growth equities (22% − 25%)
 ■Growth equities underperformed the fund’s aggregate benchmark (−1.08 
versus −0.03)
 ■The decision to underweight growth equities added to portfolio return
 Selection + Interaction = [(25%)(0.82 − (−1.08)] + [(22% − 25%)(0.82 − (−1.08)] 
 = 0.42
 ■The growth manager outperformed the growth benchmark (+0.82 versus 
−1.08). Thus, the fund sponsor’s manager selection decision, independent of 
the decision to underweight growth equities, added value.
Return Attribution Analysis at Multiple Levels 31
 ■The fund sponsor underweighted a manager who outperformed his bench -
mark [(− 3%)(0.82 − (− 1.08)]. The interaction effect was negative.
The results are summarized in Exhibit 11 .
Exhibit 11: Macro Attribution
Return Attribution (Plan Sponsor 
Level)Selection + 
Interaction Allocation Total
Total 0.94 0.04 0.98
Value Portfolio Manager 0.52 0.01 0.53
Growth Portfolio Manager 0.42 0.03 0.45
Return attribution analysis is most often calculated with reference to the portfolio’s 
agreed-upon benchmark. But it is entirely possible to attribute one portfolio against 
another when both are using the same or a similar investment strategy. The purpose 
of such analysis might be to explain an unexpected difference in return between 
two portfolios managed by the same portfolio manager using the same investment 
decision-making process.
Micro Attribution—An Example
Using the same return data, we now move to the next level of the investment 
decision-making process and will evaluate the impact of the portfolio managers’ 
decisions on total fund performance. We calculate the return attribution effects using 
the Brinson–Fachler approach at the segment level (i.e., small-cap value, large-cap 
value, and large-cap growth):
 Allocation = ( wi − Wi)(Bi − B)
 Selection + Interaction = Wi(Ri − Bi) + (wi − Wi)(Ri − Bi)
We calculate the attribution effects for the small-cap value equities:
 Allocation = (20% − 25%)[1.52 − (−0.03)] = −0.08
 Selection + Interaction = [(25%)(2.39 − 1.52)] + [(20% − 25%)(2.39 − 1.52)] 
 = 0.17
Using the same approach for large-cap value equities and large-cap growth equities 
yields the results shown in Exhibit 12 . (Note that the numbers are rounded to two 
decimal places and may not sum because of this rounding.)
Exhibit 12: Segment-Level Return Attribution
Return Attribution (Seg -
ment Level) Fund WeightSelection + 
Interaction Allocation Total
Total 100% 1.05 −0.07 0.98
Value Portfolio Manager 78% 0.63 −0.10 0.53
Small-cap value equities 20% 0.17 −0.08 0.10
Large-cap value equities 58% 0.46 −0.02 0.44
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 32
Return Attribution (Seg -
ment Level) Fund WeightSelection + 
Interaction Allocation Total
Growth Portfolio Manager 22% 0.42 0.03 0.45
Large-cap growth equities 22% 0.42 0.03 0.45
In Exhibit 12 , the attribution results in italics are calculated at the segment level. The 
attribution results at the next level above, the Value Portfolio Manager and Growth 
Portfolio Manager, are sums of the segment-level results. For example, the allocation 
effect for the Value Portfolio Manager is equal to the sum of the small-cap and large-cap 
segments: −0.08 + −0.02 = −0.10.
Summing up the segment-level results for each manager, we reach the following 
conclusions:
 ■The total outperformance at the overall fund level of 98 bps is almost 
entirely the result of positive security selection decisions (105 bps in total).
 ■The decision of the Value Portfolio Manager to underweight small cap 
in favor of large cap detracted from total fund performance because the 
small-cap value benchmark outperformed the total benchmark (1.52% ver -
sus −0.03%), leading to an allocation effect of −0.10.
 ■The large-cap value benchmark underperformed the total benchmark 
(−1.08% versus −0.03%). Because the portfolio was underweight large-cap 
value, this led to a positive allocation effect of 0.03.
 ■In total, allocation decisions contributed −7 bps.
Note that in using the total fund benchmark in this analysis, we are evaluating the 
impact  of the Value Portfolio Manager’s decision on the performance of the total fund. 
We can extend the attribution analysis down another level and examine the invest -
ment manager’s results relative to the investment process. The manager may have 
an investment process that specifically targets country allocations.3 At this level of 
analysis, the same allocation formula will calculate the impact of country allocation 
decisions within the manager’s portfolio and the selection formula will calculate the 
impact of selection decisions within each country.
If the portfolio manager has an investment process that specifically targets sector 
allocations within each country, the allocation formula can be used to calculate the 
impact of sector selection decisions within countries and the selection decisions 
within sectors.
Whatever the level of analysis, the return attribution must reflect the decision-making 
process of the portfolio manager. For example, a eurozone investment strategy might 
use a country allocation process with security selection within each country or a sector 
allocation process with security selection within each industrial sector. Exhibit 13  and 
Exhibit 14  illustrate the different results that might be reached from an analysis based 
on the investment process. In each case, an arithmetic Brinson approach has been used.
Exhibit 13: Country Allocation
 Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return AllocationSelection + 
Interaction
France 20% 30% 8.0% 6.0% 0.15% 0.40%
Germany 20% 35% 8.0% 7.0% 0.07% 0.20%
3 For some portfolios, the next level may be asset classes (as an example).
Return Attribution Analysis at Multiple Levels 33
 Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return AllocationSelection + 
Interaction
Holland 20% 10% 9.0% 15.0% 0.76% −1.20%
Italy 30% 15% 10.0% 9.0% 0.23% 0.30%
Spain 10% 10% 3.0% 3.5% 0.00% −0.05%
Total 100% 100% 8.3% 7.45% 1.20% −0.35%
Exhibit 14: Industry Sector Allocation
 Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return AllocationSelection + 
Interaction
Energy 25% 30% 18.0% 12.0% −0.23% 1.50%
Health care 30% 20% −3.0% −6.0% −1.35% 0.90%
Financial 20% 30% 10.0% 12.0% −0.46% −0.40%
Transportation 10% 15% 12.0% 8.0% −0.03% 0.40%
Metals and mining 15% 5% 10.0% 5.0% −0.25% 0.75%
Total 100% 100% 8.3% 7.45% −2.30% 3.15%
Exhibit 13  suggests that the manager demonstrated good country allocation but 
negative security selection within countries, whereas Exhibit 14  suggests that the 
manager demonstrated poor sector allocation but strongly positive security selection 
within industrial sectors. This apparent “contradiction” illustrates the importance of 
designing an attribution approach around the investment decision-making process 
used by the manager.
Drilling down to the lowest level, the same allocation and selection formulas can 
be used to calculate the contribution of individual security decisions within sectors. 
For example, the allocation formula can be used to determine the impact of over- or 
underweighting individual securities, whereas the selection formula can be used to 
determine the contribution arising from a difference in the return of a security in the 
portfolio and the return of the same security in the benchmark. If the pricing sources 
used in the portfolio and the benchmark are identical, then any difference in return 
will be caused by transaction activity. Transaction activity because of trading expenses 
and bid–offer spreads will negatively affect returns, but occasionally because of timing, 
the portfolio manager may be able to trade at advantageous prices during the day and 
recover all the transaction costs by the end of the day, resulting in a positive effect.
Exhibit 15  shows the security-level return attribution effects for a small portfolio 
of oil stocks against a customized benchmark consisting of the same oil stocks. This 
approach would be used by a pure stock picker, the only decisions in the portfolio 
being individual stock weighting and timing decisions.
Exhibit 15: Security-Level Return Attribution Effects of Pure Stock Picker
 Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return AllocationTransaction Costs 
and Timing Effects
Chevron 24% 30% 10% 10% −0.18% 0.00%
ConocoPhillips 21% 25% 8% 8% −0.04% 0.00%
ExxonMobil 41% 35% 5% 6% −0.06% −0.41%
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 34
 Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return AllocationTransaction Costs 
and Timing Effects
Marathon Oil 6% 5% 4% 4% −0.03% 0.00%
Newfield Expl. 8% 5% −5% −5% −0.36% 0.00%
Total 100% 100% 5.97% 7.05% −0.67% −0.41%
The arithmetic allocation effects of each security using the Brinson approach are as 
follows:
Chevron (24% − 30%) × (10% − 7.05%) = −0.18%
ConocoPhillips (21% − 25%) × (8.0% − 7.05%) = −0.04%
ExxonMobil (41% − 35%) × (6.0% − 7.05%) = −0.06%
Marathon Oil (6% − 5%) × (4.0% − 7.05%) = −0.03%
Newfield Exploration (8% − 5%) × (−5.0% − 7.05%) = −0.36%
Allocation in this context measures the value added from individual security selection. 
Transactions occur for only one security during the period—ExxonMobil. Therefore, 
the only selection effects (transaction costs and timing) occur for this security. The 
calculation is as follows:
ExxonMobil 41% × (5.0% − 6.0%) = −0.41%
EXAMPLE 8
Macro Attribution
1. AAA Asset Management runs a fixed-income fund of funds. The fund’s 
benchmark is a blended benchmark comprising 80% Bloomberg Barclays 
Global Aggregate Index and 20% Bloomberg Barclays Global Treasury Index 
(both in US dollars, unhedged). Two internal investment teams have been 
selected to manage the fund’s assets. The allocations to the two products are 
determined by the firm’s chief fixed-income strategist. The fund has under -
performed its benchmark in each of the last three years. You are a member 
of the board of directors, which is meeting to determine what action should 
be taken. Based solely on the data in the table below, which of the following 
courses of action would you recommend? Justify your response.
A. Terminate the manager of Product A.
B. Terminate the manager of Product B.
C. Remove the chief fixed-income strategist as manager of the fund of 
funds.
Asset- and Liability-Based Benchmarks 35
 
  Fund-of-Funds Return
  Y ear 1 
Y ear 2 
Y ear 3Cumulative 
Return
Total Fund 3.72%   −3.00%   −0.13% 0.47%
Benchmark: 3.84%   −2.94%   0.07% 0.86%
 
 
  Product Returns  
  Y ear 1   Y ear 2   Y ear 3  
  Weight Return   Weight Return   Weight Return  
Product A 0.7 4.45%   0.75 −2.50%   0.8 −0.10% 1.74%
Benchmark: Bloomberg Barclays 
Global Aggregate4.32%    −2.60%    0.29% 1.90%
Product B 0.3 2.00%   0.25 −4.50%   0.2 −0.25% −2.83%
Benchmark: Bloomberg Barclays 
Global Treasury1.93%    −4.30%    −0.79% −3.22%
 
Solution:
C is correct. Based solely on the information provided, the chief fixed-in -
come strategist’s allocation decision was the main driver of the fund’s under -
performance. Product A modestly underperformed its benchmark over the 
three-year period (−16 bps). Product B outperformed its benchmark (+39 
bps). The strategist’s allocation decisions were strongly negative in Years 
1 and 2, when he overweighted the Treasury allocation and the Treasury 
index underperformed the aggregate fund benchmark. The results of the 
attribution analysis are shown below:
 
AAA Asset Management Fixed-Income Fund-of-Funds Attribution Analysis
 
 
  Y ear 1   Y ear 2   Y ear 3
  Allocation Selection   Allocation Selection   Allocation Selection
Product A −0.05% 0.10%   −0.02% 0.08%   0.00% −0.31%
Product B −0.19% 0.01%   −0.07% −0.04%   0.00% 0.11%
Total −0.24% 0.12%   −0.09% 0.04%   0.00% −0.20%
 
ASSET- AND LIABILITY-BASED BENCHMARKS
discuss uses of liability-based benchmarks
describe types of asset-based benchmarks7
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 36
An investment benchmark is typically a collection of securities that represents the 
pool of assets available to the portfolio manager. For example, an investor in Japanese 
small-cap stocks might have a benchmark consisting of a broad portfolio of small-cap 
Japanese equities. A benchmark should reflect the investment process and the con -
straints that govern the construction of the portfolio. If the benchmark does not 
reflect the investment process, then the evaluation and analysis that flow from the 
comparison with the benchmark are flawed.
Benchmarks communicate information about the set of assets that may be con -
sidered for investment and the investment discipline. They provide investment man -
agers with a guidepost for acceptable levels of risk and return and can be a powerful 
influence on investment decision making.
In investment practice, we use benchmarks as
 ■reference points for segments of the sponsor’s portfolio,
 ■communication of instructions to the manager,
 ■communication with consultants and oversight groups (e.g., a board of 
directors),
 ■identification and evaluation of the current portfolio’s risk exposures,
 ■interpretations of past performance and performance attribution,
 ■manager selection and appraisal,
 ■marketing of investment products, and
 ■demonstrations of compliance with regulations, laws, or standards.
Benchmarks help analysts measure the effectiveness of a manager’s decisions to 
depart from benchmark weights.
When considering benchmarks, we need to understand the differences between 
a “benchmark” and a “market index. ” A market index represents the performance of 
a specific security market, market segment, or asset class. For example, the FTSE 
100 Index is constructed to represent the broad performance of large-cap UK equi -
ties. The S&P US Aggregate Bond Index is designed to measure the performance of 
publicly issued US dollar-denominated investment-grade debt. The constituents of 
these indexes are selected for their appropriateness in representing the target market, 
market segment, or asset class.
A market index may be considered for use as a benchmark or a comparison point 
for an investment manager. Consider the case of passive managers, who typically 
invest in portfolios designed to closely track the performance of market indexes. For 
example, the iShares Core S&P 500 ETF seeks investment results, before fees and 
expenses, that correspond to the price and yield performance of US large-cap stocks 
as represented by the S&P 500 Index. Because the investment objective of the iShares 
Core S&P 500 ETF is to track the performance of the S&P 500, the S&P 500 is the 
appropriate benchmark for the iShares Core S&P 500 ETF.
However, the most appropriate benchmark for an investment manager is not 
necessarily a market index. Many active managers follow specific investment disci -
plines that cannot be adequately described by a security market index. For example, 
market-neutral long–short managers typically have absolute return benchmarks—a 
specific minimum rate of return or a specified spread over a risk-free rate. Benchmarks 
must be suitable to the specific needs of the asset owner and any investment manager 
hired to manage money; market indexes are typically meant to serve the general pub -
lic’s purposes and to have broad appeal. Nonetheless, indexes can sometimes serve 
as valid benchmarks.
Another category of benchmarks is liability-based benchmarks, which focus on 
the cash flows that the asset must generate. Liability-based benchmarks are most 
often used when the assets are required to pay a specific future liability (e.g., as in a 
Asset- and Liability-Based Benchmarks 37
defined benefit pension plan). They allow the asset owner to track the fund’s prog -
ress toward fully funded status (assets greater than or equal to liabilities) or, if fully 
funded, to track the performance of assets relative to the changes in liabilities. The 
performance relative to liabilities is important because it would be possible for the 
portfolio to outperform a market index but still not meet its liabilities. Furthermore, 
a market-value-weighted index would likely be an inappropriate benchmark because 
the liability often has a targeted asset allocation and risk exposures that are different 
from those of the index.
As an example, consider the fixed-income portion of a pension fund. A cap-weighted 
index is typically not a suitable benchmark because the duration of the index is usu -
ally shorter than the duration of most pension plans’ liabilities. Furthermore, many 
fixed-income indexes are heavily weighted toward corporate bonds in the short matur -
ities, which may represent a greater degree of credit risk than the plan desires. As an 
alternative, a well-diversified portfolio of individual bonds that minimizes idiosyncratic 
risk could be used as the benchmark. A more recent innovation is liability-driven 
investment (LDI) indexes. The Bloomberg Barclays LDI Index Series is a series of 
six investible indexes designed specifically for portfolios intended to hedge pension 
liabilities. However, they may not describe a plan’s liability structure as accurately as 
a benchmark constructed specifically for the plan.
To best determine how a liability-based benchmark should be constructed, the 
manager first needs to understand the nature of the plan’s liabilities and the plan’s 
projected future cash flows. Although each plan will have its own unique character -
istics, the following plan features will influence the structure of the liability:
 ■the average number of years to retirement in the workforce,
 ■the percentage of the workforce that is retired,
 ■the average participant life expectancy,
 ■whether the benefits are indexed to inflation,
 ■whether the plan offers an early retirement option,
 ■whether the sponsor could increase its plan contributions (e.g., whether the 
sponsor is profitable and diversified),
 ■the correlation between plan assets and the sponsoring company’s operating 
assets (a lower correlation is desired so that the sponsor can make contribu -
tions when the plan requires funds), and
 ■whether the plan is a going concern (e.g., plans will eventually terminate if 
the sponsor has exited its business).
These characteristics influence the composition of the pension plan portfolio and 
hence its liability-based benchmark. Nominal bonds, real return bonds, and common 
shares are the assets most commonly found in liability-driven portfolios. The allocation 
to each asset class is driven by the proportion of accrued versus future obligations, 
whether the benefits are inflation indexed, and whether the plan is growing. A younger 
workforce means that more is allocated to equities. Greater inflation indexing of the 
benefits would imply more inflation-indexed bonds. If the fund’s managers outperform 
the benchmark constructed according to these principles, the pension obligations 
should be met. Risk and noise that cannot be modeled in the benchmark may require 
additional future contributions.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 38
EXAMPLE 9
Liability-Based Benchmarks
1. Which of the following portfolios is most likely to use a liability-based 
benchmark?
A. A portfolio managed for a private client with a goal of capital 
appreciation
B. An intermediate-duration fixed-income portfolio managed for a 
defined benefit pension fund
C. The total portfolio for a defined benefit pension fund with an asset 
allocation of 80% fixed income/20% equity
Solution:
C is correct. A liability-based benchmark is most likely to be used for the 
total pension fund portfolio as the plan sponsor tracks its funded status.
2. Which of the following most accurately describes a liability-based 
benchmark?
A. It focuses on the cash flows that the benchmarked asset must generate.
B. It represents the performance of a specific security market, market 
segment, or asset class.
C. It is a collection of securities that represents the pool of assets avail -
able to the portfolio manager.
Solution:
A is correct. A liability-based benchmark is constructed according to the 
cash flows that the benchmarked asset must generate.
Asset-Based Benchmarks
Benchmarks are an important part of the investment process for both institutional 
and private wealth clients. In the following discussion, we introduce the types of 
benchmarks based on the discussion in Bailey, Richards, and Tierney (2007) . The 
seven types of benchmarks introduced in this section are
 ■absolute (including target) return benchmarks,
 ■broad market indexes,
 ■style indexes,
 ■factor-model-based benchmarks,
 ■returns-based (Sharpe style analysis) benchmarks,
 ■manager universes (peer groups), and
 ■custom security-based (strategy) benchmarks.
An absolute return benchmark  is a minimum target return that the manager is 
expected to beat. The return may be a stated minimum (e.g., 9%), stated as a spread 
above a market index (e.g., the Euro Interbank Offered Rate + 4%), or determined 
from actuarial assumptions. An example of an absolute return benchmark is 20% 
per annum return for a private equity investment. Market-neutral long–short equity 
funds often have absolute return benchmarks. Such funds consist of long and short 
positions in perceived undervalued and overvalued equities. Overall, the portfolio is 
Asset- and Liability-Based Benchmarks 39
expected to be insensitive to broad equity market movements (i.e., market neutral with 
a market beta of zero). Therefore, market-neutral fund benchmarks may be specified 
as a three-month Treasury bill return; the investment objective is often to outperform 
the benchmark consistently by a given number of basis points.
Broad market indexes are measures of broad asset class performance, such as the 
JP Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) for emerging market bonds or the 
MSCI World Index for global developed market equities. Broad market indexes are 
well known, readily available, and easily understood. The performance of broad market 
indexes is widely reported in the popular media.
Market indexes have also been more narrowly defined to represent investment 
styles within asset classes, resulting in style indexes. An investment style  is a natural 
grouping of investment disciplines that has some predictive power in explaining the 
future dispersion of returns across portfolios.4 In the late 1970s, researchers found that 
stock valuation (e.g., the price-to-earnings ratio) and market capitalization explained 
much of stock return variation. In response, many index providers created various 
style versions of their broad market indexes (e.g., the Russell 2000 Value and Russell 
1000 Growth Indexes).
Factor-model-based benchmarks  can be constructed to more closely capture the 
investment decision-making process. Building a factor model identifies the relative 
explanatory powers of each factor in the portfolio return. Examples of factors include 
broad market index returns, industry exposure, and financial leverage. To determine 
the factor sensitivities, the portfolio’s return is regressed against the factors believed 
to influence returns. The general form of a factor model is:
 Rp = ap + b1F1 + b2F2 … bkFk + εp (12)
where
 Rp = the portfolio’s periodic return
 ap = the “zero-factor” term, which is the expected portfolio return if all factor 
sensitivities are zero
 bk = the sensitivity of portfolio returns to the factor return
 Fk = systematic factors responsible for asset returns
 εp = residual return due to nonsystematic factors
The sensitivities ( bk) are then used to predict the return the portfolio should provide 
for given values of the systematic-risk factors. Earlier, we discussed the four-factor 
Carhart model, but any key element of the investment process can be considered for 
inclusion in a factor model. As an example, if the investment manager believes that 
interest rates are inversely related to security prices, then the model can incorporate 
an interest rate factor. If interest rates unexpectedly rise, then security returns can be 
expected to fall by an amount determined by the security’s sensitivity ( bk) to interest 
rate changes.
Returns-based benchmarks  (Sharpe style analysis) are like factor-model-based 
benchmarks in that portfolio returns are related to a set of factors that explain port -
folio returns. With returns-based benchmarks, however, the factors are the returns 
for various style indexes (e.g., small-cap value, small-cap growth, large-cap value, and 
large-cap growth). The style analysis produces a benchmark of the weighted average 
of these asset class indexes that best explains or tracks the portfolio’s returns. Unlike 
the investment-style indexes previously discussed, returns-based benchmarks view 
style on a continuum . For example, a portfolio may be characterized as 60% small-cap 
4 Brown and Goetzmann (1997) .
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 40
value and 40% small-cap growth. To create a returns-based benchmark using Sharpe 
style analysis, we use an optimization procedure to force the portfolio’s sensitivities 
(analogous to the bk’s in factor-model-based benchmarks) to be non-negative and 
sum to 1.
A manager universe , or manager peer group , is a broad group of managers 
with similar investment disciplines. Although not a benchmark, per se, a manager 
universe allows investors to make comparisons with the performance of other managers 
following similar investment disciplines. Managers are typically expected to beat the 
universe’s median return. Manager universes are typically formed by asset class and 
the investment approach within that class.
Peer groups as benchmarks suffer from some significant weaknesses. Although 
managers within a peer group may all nominally be classified as “large-cap value” or 
“small-cap growth, ” for example, they may not truly be substitutable for one another. 
Some may have tilts or constraints that create an investment product very different 
from that of the median manager. A manager’s ranking within the peer group might 
change considerably with very small changes in performance, often in response to 
factors outside of the manager’s control: A change in the ranking may be driven not by 
something he did but by the actions of others in the peer group (e.g., other managers 
in the peer group may have chosen to overweight a “hot” sector, whereas the target 
manager’s investment discipline constrains him from making a similar bet).
Lastly, custom security-based benchmarks  are built to more precisely reflect 
the investment discipline of an investment manager. Such benchmarks are developed 
through discussions with the manager and an analysis of past portfolio exposures. 
After identifying the manager’s investment process, the benchmark is constructed by 
selecting securities and weightings consistent with that process and client restrictions. 
If an allocation to cash is a key component of the investment process, an appropriate 
cash weight will be incorporated into the benchmark. The benchmark is rebalanced 
on a periodic basis to ensure that it stays consistent with the manager’s investment 
practice. Custom security-based benchmarks are also referred to as strategy bench -
marks  because they should reflect the manager’s strategy. Custom security-based 
benchmarks are particularly appropriate when the manager’s strategy cannot be 
closely matched to a broad market index or style index. These benchmarks are costly 
to calculate and maintain. 
BENCHMARK SELECTION
discuss tests of benchmark quality
describe the impact of benchmark misspecification on attribution 
and appraisal analysis
The choice of benchmark often has a significant effect on the assessment of manager 
performance. Investment managers should be compared only with benchmarks that 
reflect the universe of securities available to them. A valid benchmark must satisfy 
certain criteria. We examine the characteristics of a valid benchmark by using the 
definitive list from Bailey and Tierney (1998) .
 ■Unambiguous —The individual securities and their weights in a benchmark 
should be clearly identifiable. For example, we should be able to identify 
whether Nestlé is included in a global equity benchmark and its weight.8
Benchmark Selection 41
 ■Investable —It must be possible to replicate and hold the benchmark to earn 
its return (at least gross of expenses). The sponsor should have the option 
of moving assets from active management to a passive benchmark. If the 
benchmark is not investable, it is not a viable investment alternative.
 ■Measurable —It must be possible to measure the benchmark’s return on a 
reasonably frequent and timely basis.
 ■Appropriate —The benchmark must be consistent with the manager’s invest -
ment style or area of expertise.
 ■Reflective of current investment opinions —The manager should be familiar 
with the securities that constitute the benchmark and their factor exposures. 
Managers should be able to develop an opinion regarding their attrac -
tiveness as investments; they should not be given a mandate of obscure 
securities.
 ■Specified in advance —The benchmark must be constructed prior to the eval -
uation period so that the manager is not judged against benchmarks created 
after the fact.
 ■Accountable —The manager should accept ownership of the benchmark 
and its securities and be willing to be held accountable to the benchmark. 
The benchmark should be fully consistent with the manager’s investment 
process, and the manager should be able to demonstrate the validity of his 
or her benchmark. Through acceptance of the benchmark, the sponsor 
assumes responsibility for any discrepancies between the targeted portfo -
lio for the fund and the benchmark. The manager becomes responsible for 
differences between the benchmark and her performance.
The properties outlined by Bailey and Tierney help ensure that a benchmark will 
serve as a valid instrument for the purposes of evaluating the manager’s performance. 
Although these qualities for a desirable benchmark may seem straightforward, we will 
show later that many commonly used benchmarks do not incorporate them.
EXAMPLE 10
Benchmarks
1. You have hired a bond manager to run an intermediate-duration govern -
ment fixed-income portfolio. Which type of benchmark is most suitable for 
this portfolio?
A. A broad market index
B. A liability-based benchmark
C. A factor-model-based benchmark
Solution:
A is correct. A broad market index is a suitable benchmark for a govern -
ment bond portfolio provided the maturity and duration characteristics of 
the benchmark align with those of the investment mandate.
2. You have hired a top-down quantitative equity manager who has built a pro -
prietary process based on timing the fund’s exposures to systematic risks. 
Which type of benchmark is most suitable for this portfolio?
A. A broad market index
B. A liability-based benchmark
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 42
C. A factor-model-based benchmark
Solution:
C is correct. Factors represent systematic risks. The manager’s approach 
attempts to create alpha by timing the portfolio’s exposure to factors. A fac -
tor-model-based benchmark can be constructed to represent the manager’s 
investment approach.
3. You are on the board of a pension fund that is seeking to close the gap be -
tween its assets and its liabilities. What is the most appropriate benchmark 
against which to measure the performance of the plan’s outsourced chief 
investment officer?
A. A broad market index
B. A liability-based benchmark
C. A factor-model-based benchmark
Solution:
B is correct. The primary investment objective of the pension portfolio is to 
close the gap between assets and liabilities. The performance of the pension 
fund’s manager should be evaluated relative to this objective.
4. You are a portfolio manager at JEMstone Capital. Your firm has been hired 
to run a global small-cap developed market equity portfolio. The agreement 
with the client sets a minimum market cap of US$500 million and a liquidity 
constraint that states that a portfolio holding is capped at 5 times its average 
daily liquidity over the past 12 months. Most portfolios managed by the firm 
are managed without constraint against the MSCI ACWI Small Cap Index, 
which has an average market cap of approximately $1.2 billion and a median 
market cap of approximately $650 million. A stock is eligible for inclusion 
in the index if the shares traded over the prior three months are equal to at 
least 20% of the security’s free-float-adjusted market capitalization.5 Your 
team is discussing the suitability of the MSCI ACWI Small Cap Index for 
this portfolio. Discuss the validity of this benchmark using the Richards and 
Tierney framework.
Solution:
 ■The benchmark meets the criteria of unambiguous . The individual 
securities and their weights are clearly identifiable.
 ■The benchmark most likely meets the criteria of investable . The shares 
in the index are freely tradeable.
 ■The benchmark meets the criteria of measurable.  Index returns are 
published daily.
 ■The benchmark does not  meet the criteria of appropriate . The liquidity 
and capitalization constraints imposed by the client are not consistent 
with the manner in which the manager runs other portfolios managed 
by the firm.
5 This is a very abbreviated representation of the liquidity constraint used in the construction of the MSCI 
indexes. For a more complete description of the liquidity requirements, refer to “MSCI Global Investable 
Market Indexes Methodology”: www  .msci  .com/  eqb/  methodology/  meth  _docs/  MSCI  _GIMIMethodology  
_Nov2018  .pdf (accessed 5 December 2019).
Benchmark Selection 43
 ■The benchmark meets the criteria of reflective of current investment 
opinions . The benchmark was selected by the manager and is pre -
sumed to be representative of the manager’s investment process.
 ■The benchmark meets the criteria of specified in advance . The bench -
mark is not created after the fact.
 ■The manager may choose to be accountable  to this index if the liquid -
ity and capitalization constraints are not expected to interfere with the 
ability to execute the investment strategy. The client should be made 
aware of the discrepancies between the portfolio constraints and the 
benchmark.
Evaluating Benchmark Quality: Analysis Based on a 
Decomposition of Portfolio Holdings and Returns
Once a benchmark is constructed, we can evaluate its quality using tests. To understand 
these tests, it helps to first decompose the benchmark’s returns. Using the decom -
position from Bailey et al. (2007) , we can first state the identity where a portfolio’s 
return (P) is equal to itself:
 P = P (13)
Then, add an appropriate benchmark (B) to, and subtract this benchmark from, the 
right-hand side of the equation:
 P = B + (P − B) (14)
The term P − B is the result of the manager’s active management decisions, which we 
denote as A. Thus, we have
 P = B + A  (15)
From Equations 13–15, we see that the portfolio return is a function of the benchmark 
and the manager’s active decisions.
Next, add the market index return (M) to and subtract it from the right-hand side 
of the equation:
 P = M + (B − M) + A  (16)
The difference between the benchmark return and the market index (B − M) is 
the manager’s style return, which we denote as S:
 P = M + S + A  (17)
Equation 17 states that the portfolio return (P) is a result of the market index 
return (M), a style return (S), and the active management return (A).
If the manager’s portfolio is a broad market index where S = 0 and A = 0, then the 
portfolio earns the broad market return: P = M.
If the benchmark is a broad market index, then S is assumed to be zero and the 
prediction is that the manager earns the market return and a return to active manage -
ment: P = M + A. However, if the benchmark is a broad market index and the manager 
does  have style differences from the benchmark, the analysis using the broad market 
benchmark is incorrect. In this case, any style return (S) will be lumped together with 
the measured active management component (A), such that an analysis of a manager’s 
true added value will be obscured.
We can use these benchmark building blocks to further search for systematic 
biases between the active management return and the style return, identified through 
correlation. For instance, if we measure the correlation between active management 
return, A = (P − B), and style return, S = (B − M), we can identify whether the manager’s 
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 44
active selection decisions align with the style currently favored by the market. A good 
benchmark should not reflect these systematic biases, where the correlation between A 
and S should not be statistically different from zero. Likewise, we define the difference 
between the portfolio and the broad market index as E = (P − M). When a manager’s 
style (S) is in (out of) favor relative to the market, we expect both the benchmark and 
the account to outperform (underperform) the market. Therefore, a good benchmark 
will have a statistically significant positive correlation coefficient between S and E.
EXAMPLE 11
Decomposition of Portfolio Return
1. Assume that the Courtland account has a return of −5.3% in a given month, 
during which the portfolio benchmark has a return of −5.5% and the market 
index has a return of −2.8%.
A. Calculate the Courtland account’s return due to the manager’s style.
B. Calculate the Courtland account’s return due to active management.
Solution:
A. The return due to style is S = B − M = −5.5% − (−2.8%) = −2.7%.
B. The return due to active management is A = P − B = −5.3% − (−5.5%) 
= 0.2%.
2. Assume that Mr. Kuti’s account has a return of 5.6% in a given month, 
during which the portfolio benchmark has a return of 5.1% and a market 
index has a return of 3.2%.
A. Calculate the return due to the manager’s style for Mr. Kuti’s account.
B. Calculate the return due to active management for Mr. Kuti’s account.
Solution:
A. The return due to style is S = B − M = 5.1% − 3.2% = 1.9%.
B. The return due to active management is A = P − B = 5.6% − 5.1% = 
0.5%.
3. An actively managed mid-cap value equity portfolio has a return of 9.24%. 
The portfolio is benchmarked to a mid-cap value index that has a return 
of 7.85%. A broad equity market index has a return of 8.92%. Calculate the 
return due to the portfolio manager’s style.
Solution:
The return due to style is the style-specific benchmark return of 7.85% mi -
nus the broad market return of 8.92%: −1.07%.
4. A US large-cap value portfolio run by Anderson Investment Management 
returned 18.9% during the first three quarters of 2019. During the same time 
period, a US large-cap value index had a return of 21.7% and a broad US 
equity index returned 25.2%.
A. Calculate the return due to style.
B. Calculate the return due to active management.
Benchmark Selection 45
C. Using your answers to A and B, discuss Anderson’s performance rela -
tive to the benchmark and relative to the market.
Solution:
A. The return due to style is the difference between the benchmark and 
the market index, or S = (B − M) = (21.7% − 25.2%) = −3.5%.
B. The return due to active management is the difference between the 
portfolio and the benchmark, or A = (P − B) = (18.9% − 21.7%) = 
−2.8%.
C. Anderson’s underperformance relative to the broad US equity index is 
partly a function of style and partly a function of the manager’s weak 
performance within the style. Given that the US large-cap value index 
underperformed the US market index by 3.5%, we can infer that large-
cap value was out of favor during the period measured. Provided the 
US large-cap value index is an appropriate benchmark for Anderson, 
the manager’s underperformance bears further investigation. The cli -
ent would want to understand the specific drivers of the underperfor -
mance and relate those decisions to the manager’s stated investment 
process.
Importance of Choosing the Correct Benchmark
As we have described, performance evaluation and attribution require appropriate 
benchmarks. When benchmarks are misspecified, subsequent performance measure -
ment will be incorrect; both the attribution and the appraisal analyses will be useless.
For example, consider a manager who invests in Japanese stocks. The sponsor uses 
the MSCI Pacific Index to evaluate the manager. Japanese stocks constitute most of 
the MSCI Pacific, but the index also includes four other developed markets (Australia, 
New Zealand, Hong Kong SAR, and Singapore). Thus, the MSCI Japan Index more 
closely represents the manager’s normal portfolio. The returns were as follows:
 ■Manager return: 18.0%
 ■MSCI Pacific (investor’s benchmark) return: 20.0%
 ■MSCI Japan (normal portfolio) return: 9.0%
Although the manager underperformed  the investor’s benchmark (18.0% for the 
manager versus 20.0% for the MSCI Pacific), the manager outperformed  when correctly 
benchmarked against the normal portfolio (18.0% for the manager versus 9.0% for the 
normal portfolio). In summary,
 ■True Active Return = Mgr Return − Normal Portfolio Return = 18.0 − 9.0 = 
9.0%
 ■Investor (Mismeasured) Active Return = Mgr Return − Investor Benchmark 
return = (Mgr Return - Normal portfolio Return) + (Normal Portfolio 
Return - Investor Benchmark return) = True Active Return + Misfit Active 
Return = 18.0 − 20.0 = -9.0 + (−11.0) = −2.0%
Measuring the manager’s results against the normal portfolio instead of the inves -
tor’s benchmark more accurately evaluates the manager’s performance. The manager’s 
negative “true” active return indicates that the manager outperformed the normal 
portfolio. Fundamentally, any further performance attribution against the investor’s 
benchmark will also be useless. By using the incorrect benchmark, the attribution 
would attempt to explain an underperformance, rather than the true active return, 
which contributed positively to the investor’s return.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 46
Peer group benchmarking is particularly susceptible to selection problems. For 
example, practitioners must select the appropriate peers without suggesting to the 
portfolio managers that median peer group performance is the target. Peer group 
benchmarks provide an incentive not to underperform the peer group median, often 
leading to herding around the median return. As a result, the investment decisions of 
the fund manager can be biased by the structure of the benchmarks chosen.
Sometimes, benchmarks are chosen for the wrong reasons. Underperforming 
managers have been known to change benchmarks to improve their measured excess 
return, which is both inappropriate and unethical.
Benchmark misspecification can lead to mismeasurement of the value added by the 
portfolio managers. A “normal portfolio” or “normal benchmark” is the portfolio that 
most closely represents the manager’s typical positions in his investment universe. The 
manager’s “true” active return is equal to his return minus his normal portfolio return.
Most investors, however, tend to use a broad market benchmark for manager 
evaluation. The manager’s active return is thus measured as the manager’s return 
minus the investor’s benchmark return. There is a mismatch between the broad market 
benchmark and the manager’s “normal” portfolio or benchmark; this is not the man -
ager’s “true” active return but is more appropriately termed the “misfit active return” 
(see, e.g., Gastineau, Olma, and Zielinski 2007). Using a broad market index typically 
misses the manager’s style (i.e., creates style bias). This decomposition is useful for 
understanding the impact of a misspecified benchmark on performance appraisal.
For example, consider a manager who invests in US value stocks. The sponsor 
uses the broad Russell 3000 equity index (the “investor’s benchmark”) to evaluate the 
manager. However, the manager’s normal portfolio is better represented by his or her 
universe of value stocks. In this example, the manager returns 15%, the Russell 3000 
(the investor’s benchmark) return is 10%, and the manager’s normal portfolio return 
is 18%. Although the manager has outperformed the investor’s benchmark (15% ver -
sus 10%), the manager has underperformed when correctly benchmarked against the 
normal portfolio (15% versus 18%).
BENCHMARKING ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENTS
describe problems that arise in benchmarking alternative 
investments
Performance evaluation for alternative asset classes presents many challenges. The 
selection of an appropriate benchmark is stymied by the lack of high-quality, investible 
market indexes, the frequent use of leverage in many strategies, the limited liquidity 
and lack of readily available market values for many underlying assets, and the use of 
internal rates of return rather than time-weighted rates of return.
In the following sections addressing each of the major alternative asset classes, we 
will consider how these challenges affect performance evaluation.
Benchmarking Hedge Fund Investments
Hedge funds do not represent an asset class, such as equities or fixed income. Rather, 
hedge funds encompass a broad range of possible strategies designed to exploit 
market inefficiencies. Hedge funds may have an unlimited investment universe, vary 
substantially from one to another, and can vary their asset allocations over time. 9
Benchmarking Alternative Investments 47
Hedge funds also use leverage, sell assets short, take positions in derivatives, and may 
be opportunistic in their choice of strategy. These characteristics make it difficult to 
create a single standard against which hedge funds should be judged.
Some hedge funds lever many times their capital base, which increases their 
expected return and risk. Short positions and derivatives used in long–short strategies 
can increase return or reduce risk. A manager’s use of style, leverage, short positions, 
and derivatives may change over time. Hedge funds also typically lack transparency, 
are difficult to monitor, and are often illiquid.
These characteristics of hedge funds make it clear that broad market indexes are 
unsuitable as hedge fund benchmarks.
The risk-free rate (e.g., Treasury yield) plus a spread (e.g., 3%–6%) is sometimes 
advocated as a hedge fund benchmark for arbitrage-based hedge fund strategies. The 
argument for using the risk-free rate is that investors desire a positive return and that 
arbitrage strategies are risk free, with the spread reflecting the active management 
return and management costs.
However, most funds, even those that target market-neutral strategies, are not 
completely free of systematic risk, and the use of leverage could magnify that systematic 
risk. In this case, the spread relative to the risk-free rate should be adjusted upward.
Both broad market indexes and the risk-free rate will be weakly correlated or uncor -
related with hedge fund returns, thus failing the benchmark quality test of Bailey et al. 
(2007)  that states that portfolio and benchmark factor sensitivities should be similar.
Because of the shortcomings of broad market indexes and the risk-free rate, hedge 
fund manager universes from such providers as CSFB/Tremont are often used as hedge 
fund benchmarks. Hedge fund peer universes are subject to a number of limitations:
1. The risk and return characteristics of a strategy peer group is unlikely to be 
representative of the approach taken by a single fund.
2. Hedge fund peer groups suffer from survivorship and backfill bias. Backfill 
bias occurs when the index provider adds a manager to the index and 
imports the manager’s entire return history.
3. Hedge fund performance data are often self-reported and typically not 
confirmed by the index provider. A fund’s reported net asset value may be a 
managed value. Even if the manager has no intention to misreport the data, 
hedge funds hold illiquid assets that require some subjectivity in pricing. 
If the previous period’s price is used as the current price or an appraisal 
is used, then the data will be smoothed. The presence of stale pricing will 
result in downward-biased standard deviations and temporal instability in 
correlations, with hedge funds potentially given larger portfolio allocations 
as a result.
Benchmarking Real Estate Investments
There are numerous private real estate indexes offered by industry associations, large 
and small index providers, investment consultants, and others who collect real estate 
data. There are indexes and sub-indexes for nearly all the major developed countries, 
major sectors, investment styles, and structures (open-end and closed-end funds). 
Choosing the appropriate real estate benchmark requires careful consideration and 
an understanding of the limitations of such benchmarks—and their relevance to 
the investment strategy under evaluation. The following are some limitations of the 
available real estate benchmarks:
1. The benchmarks are based on a subset of the real estate opportunity set and, 
therefore, are not fully representative of the asset class.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 48
2. Index performance is likely to be highly correlated with the returns of the 
largest fund data contributors.
3. Benchmark returns are based on manager-reported performance and may 
be inherently biased.
4. Benchmarks weighted by fund or asset value may place a disproportionate 
emphasis on the most expensive cities and asset types.
5. Valuations of the underlying properties are typically based on appraisals 
because there are few transactions to measure. Appraisals are infrequent, 
they smooth changes in property values, and they can lag underlying prop -
erty performance. Transaction-based indexes are becoming more readily 
available.
6. Some benchmark returns are unlevered, whereas others contain varying 
degrees of leverage based on the structure used by the investor that contrib -
uted the data.
7. Real estate indexes do not reflect the high transaction costs, limited trans -
parency, and lack of liquidity that drive performance for actual real estate 
investments.
Further complicating the performance evaluation of real estate funds is the selection 
of the appropriate return measure. Open-end funds, for which the contributions and 
withdrawals are at the discretion of the investor, generally use time-weighted rates 
of return. Closed-end funds, however, for which the timing of the contributions and 
withdrawals is at the discretion of the fund manager, generally report using internal 
rates of return.
Benchmarking Private Equity
When measuring the performance of a private equity investment, investors typically 
calculate an internal rate of return (IRR) based on cash flows since inception of the 
investment and the ending valuation of the investment (the net asset value or resid -
ual value). Similarly, major venture capital benchmarks, such as those of Cambridge 
Associates, provide IRR estimates for private equity funds that are based on fund 
cash flows and valuations. Major indexes serving as benchmarks for US and European 
private equity include those provided by Cambridge Associates, Preqin, and LPX.
These benchmarks can be used to compare the managers’ individual funds with 
an appropriate peer group, normally defined by subclass, geography, and vintage year 
of the underlying fund. Benchmarks commonly used for this purpose include ones 
prepared by Burgiss, Cambridge Associates, and the Institutional Limited Partners 
Association.
Although relative performance measures help an investor understand how a fund 
performs relative to peers or a relevant public index, there are several limitations to 
be aware of when comparing returns among managers:
1. The valuation methodology used by the managers may differ.
2. A fund’s IRR can be meaningfully influenced by an early loss or an early win 
in the portfolio. 
3. The data are from a specific point in time, and the companies in a fund can 
be at different stages of development.
The public market equivalent (PME) methodology has been developed to allow 
comparisons of private equity IRRs with returns of publicly traded equity indexes. 
The methodology uses cash flow data to replicate the general partner’s capital calls 
and distributions, assuming these same cash flows were invested in the chosen equity 
index. Comparing the performance of the PME index with the net IRR of the fund 
Benchmarking Alternative Investments 49
reveals the extent of over- or underperformance of the PME index relative to the public 
index. Several PME methodologies exist, the most common being Long–Nickels PME, 
PME+, Kaplan and Schoar PME, and Direct Alpha PME. It is important to choose the 
appropriate PME for each private equity fund; a poorly chosen PME raises the risk of 
leading the investor to an incorrect conclusion.
Benchmarking Commodity Investments
Commodity benchmarks tend to use indexes based on the performance of futures-based 
commodity investments. These include the Reuters/Jefferies Commodity Research 
Bureau (RJ/CRB) Index, the S&P Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI), and the 
Bloomberg Commodity Index (BCOM). However, because the indexes use futures, 
rather than actual assets, they attempt to replicate the returns available to holding 
long positions in commodities. The S&P GSCI, the BCOM, and the RJ/CRB Index 
provide returns comparable to those of passive long positions in listed futures con -
tracts. Because the cost-of-carry model ensures that the return on a fully margined 
position in a futures contract mimics the return on an underlying spot deliverable, 
futures contract returns are often used as a surrogate for cash market performance.
These indexes are considered investable. The major indexes contain some common 
groups of underlying assets. For example, the RJ/CRB Index, the BCOM, and the S&P 
GSCI all include energy (oil and gas), metals (industrial and precious), grains (corn, 
soybeans, and wheat), and soft commodities (cocoa, coffee, cotton, and sugar). However, 
beyond these basic groupings, they and other commodity indexes vary greatly in their 
composition and weighting schemes. A market-cap-weighting scheme, so common 
for equity and bond market indexes, cannot be carried over to indexes of commodity 
futures. Because every long futures position has a corresponding short futures position, 
the market capitalization of a futures contract is always zero.
Benchmarking of commodity investments presents similar challenges to other 
alternatives, including
1. the use of derivatives to represent actual commodity assets,
2. varying degrees of leverage among funds, and
3. the discretionary weighting of exposures within the index.
Benchmarking Managed Derivatives
Because market indexes do not exist for managed derivatives, the benchmarks are 
typically specific to a single investment strategy. For example, the Mount Lucas 
Management Index takes both long and short positions in many futures markets 
based on a technical (moving-average) trading rule that is, in effect, specific to an 
active momentum strategy.
Other derivative benchmarks are based on peer groups. For example, the 
BarclayHedge and CISDM CTA trading strategy benchmarks are based on peer 
groups of commodity trading advisers (CTAs). The CISDM CTA Equal Weighted 
Index reflects manager returns for all reporting managers in the CISDM CTA database. 
These indexes suffer from the known limitations of peer group–based benchmarks, 
including survivorship bias.
Benchmarking Distressed Securities
Distressed securities are illiquid and almost non-marketable at the time of purchase, 
making it very difficult to find suitable benchmarks. If the companies’ prospects 
improve, the values of the distressed securities may go up gradually and liquidity may 
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 50
improve. Typically, it takes a relatively long time for this strategy to play out; thus, 
valuing the holdings may be a challenge. It is difficult to estimate the true market 
values of distressed securities, and stale pricing is almost inevitable.
One possible strategy is to use market indexes, such as the Barclay Distressed 
Securities Index. This index is constructed from fund managers who invest in dis -
tressed securities. Because this index is constructed from multiple strategies, however, 
it is difficult to discern whether the index is suitable for a given investment approach. 
In addition, because the valuations for the member funds are calculated at random 
intervals, it doesn’t necessarily correct for the valuation issues noted previously.
PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL: RISK-BASED MEASURES
calculate and interpret the Sortino ratio, the appraisal ratio, upside/
downside capture ratios, maximum drawdown, and drawdown 
duration
describe limitations of appraisal measures and related metrics
Investment performance appraisal identifies and measures investment skill, providing 
the information to assess how effectively money has been invested given the risks that 
were taken. (Risk-adjusted past performance is just one of many considerations when 
choosing investment managers. Qualitative considerations, although not within the 
scope of this reading, are also very important.)
Performance appraisal is most often concerned with ranking investment managers 
who follow similar investment disciplines. Return attribution provides information 
that can complement a performance appraisal analysis by providing more details 
about the consequences of managerial decisions. Performance attribution identifies 
and quantifies the sources of added value, whereas performance appraisal seeks to 
ascertain whether added value was a result of managerial skill.
Skill in any profession can be thought of as the ability to influence outcomes in 
desired directions. We define active investment management skill as the ability of a 
portfolio manager to add value on a risk-adjusted basis through investment analysis 
and insights. In everyday language, active investment skill is typically viewed as the 
ability to “beat the market” or an assigned benchmark with some consistency. The 
evaluation of active management skill is the focus of performance appraisal and this 
reading.
Distinguishing Investment Skill from Luck
An investment manager’s record for any specific period will reflect good luck (unan -
ticipated good developments) and bad luck (unanticipated bad developments). One 
reason that luck should be considered important when appraising investment per -
formance is the paradox of skill. As people become more knowledgeable about an 
activity, the difference between the worst and the best performers becomes narrower. 
Thus, the ever-increasing aggregate skill level of investment managers, supplemented 
by massive computing power and access to “big data, ” may lead to narrower invest -
ment performance differentials and a greater likelihood that these differentials can 
be explained by luck.10
Performance Appraisal: Risk-Based Measures 51
Deciding whether a portfolio manager has or lacks active investment skill on the 
basis of past returns is difficult and always subject to error. Financial market returns 
have a large element of randomness. Some of this randomness reflects the impact of 
news and information that relate directly or indirectly to asset values. Trading moti -
vated by liquidity needs and by the emotions of investors adds to return volatility.
When we observe the historical performance of an investment portfolio, we see 
only one out of a potentially unlimited number of outcomes for a manager applying 
the same investment discipline but with different luck. Perhaps we gain additional 
insight into skill by examining the consistency of performance over time. But the 
hypothesis that the manager’s underlying mean return exceeds the benchmark’s mean 
return may require many years of observations to confirm with a reasonably high 
degree of confidence.6
Appraisal Measures
The academic and the professional investment literatures have developed several 
returns-based measures to assess the value of active management. Important mea -
sures include the following:
 ■Sharpe ratio
 ■Treynor ratio
 ■Information ratio
 ■Appraisal ratio
 ■Sortino ratio
 ■Capture ratios
The selection of an appropriate appraisal measure requires an understanding of 
which aspect of risk is most important given the role of the investment in the client’s 
total portfolio. It is also important to understand the assumptions a measure makes 
about the probability distribution of possible returns and any assumptions regarding 
the underlying theoretical pricing model. The Sharpe, information, and Treynor ratios 
are covered elsewhere in the curriculum and are not covered in depth here. This 
section will focus primarily on the remaining measures.
The Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe ratio  measures the additional return for bearing risk above the risk-free 
rate, stated per unit of return volatility. In performance appraisal, this additional 
return is often referred to as excess return . This use contrasts with how “excess 
return” is used in return performance attribution—that is, as a return in excess of a 
benchmark’s return.
The Sharpe ratio is commonly used on an ex post  basis to evaluate historical 
risk-adjusted returns, as in
   S  A   =      _
 R    A   −    _ r    f   _    ˆ σ    A      (18)
6 Can you be lucky once and correctly pick the flip of a fair coin? Of course! How about four times in a 
row? Yes, although this outcome is much less likely. Can a portfolio manager be lucky enough to generate 
15 continuous years of superior investment performance? This outcome is very unlikely, but with hundreds 
or even thousands of portfolio managers, a few might succeed solely because of luck. One problem faced 
in investment performance appraisal is that many investment management performance records are only 
a few years long, making it difficult to distinguish between luck and skill.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 52
One weakness of the Sharpe ratio is that the use of standard deviation as a measure 
of risk assumes investors are indifferent between upside and downside volatility. For 
example, for an investor looking for a potentially high-rewarding investment, volatility 
on the upside is not necessarily a negative. Similarly, risk-averse investors concerned 
about the preservation of capital are clearly most concerned with downside risk.
The Treynor Ratio
The Treynor ratio ( Treynor 1965 ) measures the excess return per unit of systematic 
risk. With the Treynor ratio, as well as the systematic-risk-based appraisal measures 
that follow, we must carefully choose an efficient market benchmark against which to 
measure the systematic risk of the manager’s fund. In contrast, the Sharpe ratio can be 
compared among different funds without the explicit choice of a market benchmark.
   T  A   =      _
 R    A   −    _ r    f   _    ˆ β    A      (19)
The usefulness of the Treynor ratio depends on whether systematic risk or total risk 
is most appropriate in evaluating performance. Because of its reliance on beta, the 
Treynor ratio shows how a fund has performed in relation not to its own volatility 
but to the volatility it would bring to a well-diversified portfolio. Thus, a ranking of 
portfolios based on the Treynor ratio is most useful if the portfolios whose perfor -
mance is being evaluated are being combined in a broader, fully diversified portfolio. 
The ratio is most informative when the portfolios being evaluated are compared with 
the same benchmark index.
The Information Ratio
The information ratio (IR) is a simple measure that allows the evaluator to assess 
performance relative to the benchmark, scaled by risk. The implicit assumption is that 
the chosen benchmark is well matched to the risk of the investment strategy. The IR 
is calculated by dividing the portfolio’s mean excess return relative to its benchmark 
by the variability of that excess return, as shown in Equation 18. The denominator 
of the information ratio, σ( rp − rB), is the portfolio’s tracking risk, a measure of how 
closely a portfolio follows the index to which it is benchmarked. (Many writers use 
“tracking error” in the sense of “tracking risk, ” although, confusingly, tracking error 
is also used to refer to simply the return difference between a passive portfolio and 
its benchmark.)
  IR =   E   (   r  p   )     − E   (   r  B   )      ____________   
σ   (   r  p   −  r  B   )        (20)
The Appraisal Ratio
The appraisal ratio (AR) is a returns-based measure, like the IR. It is the annualized 
alpha divided by the annualized residual risk. In the appraisal ratio, both the alpha 
and the residual risk are computed from a factor regression. Although the AR can 
be computed using any factor model appropriate for the portfolio, the measure was 
first introduced by Treynor and Black (1973)  using Jensen’s alpha and the standard 
deviation of the portfolio’s residual or non-systematic risk. Treynor and Black argued 
that security selection ability implies that deviations from benchmark portfolio weights 
can be profitable and showed that the optimal deviations from the benchmark hold -
ings for securities depend on what they called an “appraisal ratio. ” The appraisal ratio 
is also referred to as the Treynor–Black ratio  or the Treynor–Black appraisal ratio .
The appraisal ratio measures the reward of active management relative to the risk 
of active management (alpha from a factor model):
  AR =   α _  σ  ε      (21)
Performance Appraisal: Risk-Based Measures 53
where σε equals the standard deviation of εt, commonly denoted as the “standard 
error of regression, ” which is readily available from the output of commonly used 
statistical software.
The Sortino Ratio
The Sortino ratio is a modification of the Sharpe ratio that penalizes only those returns 
that are lower than a user-specified return. The Sharpe ratio penalizes both upside 
and downside volatility equally.
Equation 22 presents the ex ante  Sortino ratio, where rT is the minimum accept -
able return (MAR), which is sometimes referred to as a target rate of return .7 Instead 
of using standard deviation in the denominator, the Sortino ratio uses a measure of 
downside risk known as target semi-standard deviation or target semideviation, σD, 
as shown in Equation 23. By using this value, the Sortino ratio penalizes managers 
only for “harmful” volatility and is a measure of return per unit of downside risk.
   SR  D   =   E   (   r  p   )     −  r  T   _   σ  D      (22)
    ˆ SR   D   =      _ r    p   −    _ r    T   _    ˆ σ    D      (23)
   σ  D   =   ⎡
 ⎢ 
⎣     ∑ 
t=1  N
  min   (   r  t   −  r  T  , 0 )     2    ______________  N   ⎤
 ⎥ 
⎦     1/2
   (24)
Assume a portfolio has an MAR of 4.0%. The portfolio’s returns over a 10-year period 
are given in Exhibit 16 . The numerator of the Sortino ratio is the average portfolio 
return minus the target return:     _ r    p   −    _ r    T    = 6.0% − 4.0% = 2.0%. The calculation of target 
semi-standard deviation is reported in Exhibit 16 . Based on the information in the 
table, the Sortino ratio is approximately 0.65.
Exhibit 16: Sortino Ratio Using Target Semi-Standard Deviation
    Target Return: rT = 4%
Y ear Rate of Return: rt min( rt − rT,0)2
1 6.0% 0
2 8.0% 0
3 −1.0% 0.0025
4 18.0% 0
5 12.0% 0
6 3.0% 0.0001
7 −4.0% 0.0064
8 5.0% 0
9 2.0% 0.0004
10 11.0% 0
7 The MAR is the lowest rate of return at which an investor will consider investing. For example, an MAR 
set equal to the expected rate of inflation would be associated with capital preservation in real terms. It is 
possible to use the benchmark return as the MAR. The MAR does not determine intrinsic value. Rather, 
it is a constraint or decision criterion that applies to all investment considerations.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 54
    Target Return: rT = 4%
Y ear Rate of Return: rt min( rt − rT,0)2
 
  ∑ 
t=1  N
  min   (   r  t   −  r  T  , 0 )     2   = 0.0094   
 
  σ  D   =   ⎡
 ⎢ 
⎣     ∑ 
t=1  N
  min   (   r  t   −  r  T  , 0 )     2    ______________  N   ⎤
 ⎥ 
⎦     1/2
   =   (    0.0094 _ 10   )     1/2  = 3.07% 
More so than traditional performance measures, the Sortino ratio offers the ability to 
accurately assess performance when return distributions are not symmetrical. For exam -
ple, because of its underlying assumption of normally distributed returns, the Sharpe 
ratio would not effectively distinguish between strategies with greater-than-normal 
upside volatility (positively skewed strategies, such as trend following) and strategies 
with greater-than-normal downside volatility (negatively skewed strategies, such as 
option writing). Both types of volatility are penalized equally in the Sharpe ratio. The 
Sortino ratio is arguably a better performance metric for such assets as hedge funds 
or commodity trading funds, whose return distributions are purposefully skewed 
away from the normal.
The Sortino ratio formula is not a risk premium. It is the return a portfolio manager 
generates that is greater than what is minimally acceptable to the investor. Essentially, 
the Sortino ratio penalizes a manager when portfolio return is lower than the MAR; it 
is most relevant when one of the investor’s primary objectives is capital preservation.
Although there are arguments in favor of both the Sharpe ratio and the Sortino 
ratio, the Sharpe ratio has been much more widely used. In some cases, this prefer -
ence may reflect a certain comfort level associated with the use of standard deviation, 
which is a more traditional measure of volatility. Also, cross-sectional comparisons 
of Sortino ratios are difficult to make applicable to every investor, because the MAR 
is investor-specific.
EXAMPLE 12
Performance Appraisal Measures
1. Portfolio B delivered 10.0% annual returns on average over the past 60 
months. Its average annual volatility as measured by standard deviation 
was 14.0%, and its downside volatility as measured by target semi-standard 
deviation was 8.0%. Assuming the target rate of return is 3.0% per year, the 
Sortino ratio of portfolio B is closest to:
A. 0.66.
B. 0.77.
C. 0.88.
Solution:
C is correct.
    ˆ SR   D   =      _ r    p   −    _ r    T   _    ˆ σ    D     =   0.10 − 0.03 _  0.08   = 0.88 
Performance Appraisal: Risk-Based Measures 55
2. Why might a practitioner use the Sortino ratio, rather than the Sharpe ratio, 
to indicate performance?
A. He is measuring option writing.
B. The return distributions are not symmetrical.
C. The investor’s primary objective is capital preservation.
D. All of the above
Solution:
D is correct, because the Sortino ratio is more relevant when return distri -
butions are not symmetrical, as with option writing. The Sortino ratio is also 
preferable when one of the primary objectives is capital preservation.
3. Portfolio Y delivered an average annualized return of 9.0% over the past 60 
months. The annualized standard deviation over this same time period was 
20.0%. The market index returned 8.0% per year on average over the same 
time period, with an annualized standard deviation of 12.0%. Portfolio Y has 
an estimated beta of 1.40 versus the market index. Assuming the risk-free 
rate is 3.0% per year, the appraisal ratio is closest  to:
A. ‒0.8492.
B. ‒0.0922.
C. ‒0.0481.
Solution:
B is correct. Jensen’s alpha is −1.0%: αp = 9.0% − [3.0% + 1.40(8.0% − 3.0%)] 
= −1.0% = −0.01. Non-systematic risk is 0.011776:   σ   ε  p    2    = 0.202 − 1.402(0.122) 
= 0.011776. The appraisal ratio is approximately −0.0922:    ˆ AR   =   − 0.01 _  √ _ 0.011776       = 
−0.0922.
4. The appraisal ratio is the ratio of the portfolio’s alpha to the standard devia -
tion of its:
A. total risk.
B. systematic risk.
C. non-systematic risk.
Solution:
C is correct. The appraisal ratio is the ratio of the portfolio’s alpha to the 
standard deviation of the portfolio’s non-systematic risk. Essentially, this 
ratio allows an investor to evaluate whether excess returns warrant the addi -
tional non-systematic risk in actively managed portfolios.
5. Assume a target return of 3.0%. Annual returns over the past four years have 
been 6.0%, −3.0%, 7.0%, and 1.0%. The target semi-standard deviation is 
closest  to:
A. 1.33%.
B. 3.16%.
C. 4.65%.
Solution:
B is correct.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 56
 
    Target Return: rT = 3%
Y ear Rate of Return: rt min( rt − rT, 0)2
1 6.0% 0
2 −3.0% 0.0036
3 7.0% 0
4 1.0% 0.0004
   ∑ 
t=1  N
  min   (   r  t   −  r  T  , 0 )     2   = 0.004
   σ  D   =   ⎡
 ⎢ 
⎣     ∑ 
t=1  N
  min   (   r  t   −  r  T  , 0 )     2    ______________  N   ⎤
 ⎥ 
⎦     1/2
  =    (    0.004 _ 4   )     1/2  ≈ 0.0316  = 3.16% 
 
PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL: CAPTURE RATIOS AND 
DRAWDOWNS
calculate and interpret the Sortino ratio, the appraisal ratio, upside/
downside capture ratios, maximum drawdown, and drawdown 
duration
describe limitations of appraisal measures and related metrics
In investing, we understand that large losses require proportionally greater gains to 
reverse or offset. Performance measures used to monitor this aspect of manager per -
formance include capture ratios and drawdowns. Capture ratios have several variations 
that reflect various aspects of the manager’s gain or loss relative to the gain or loss of the 
benchmark. Capture ratios also help assess manager suitability relative to the investor, 
especially in relation to the investor’s time horizon and risk tolerance. Drawdown  is 
the loss in value incurred in any continuous period of negative returns. A manager 
who experiences larger drawdowns may be less suitable for an investor with a shorter 
time horizon. This section reviews capture ratios and drawdowns, their implications 
for performance, and their use in evaluating manager performance and suitability.
Capture Ratios
Capture ratios measure the manager’s participation in up and down markets—that 
is, the manager’s percentage return relative to that of the benchmark. The upside 
capture ratio, or upside capture (UC), measures capture when the benchmark return 
is positive. The downside capture ratio, or downside capture (DC), measures capture 
when the benchmark return is negative. Upside capture greater (less) than 100% 
generally suggests outperformance (underperformance) relative to the benchmark, 
and downside capture less (greater) than 100% generally suggests outperformance 
(underperformance) relative to the benchmark. Practitioners should note that when the 11
Performance Appraisal: Capture Ratios and Drawdowns 57
manager and benchmark returns are of the opposite sign, the ratio will be negative—
for example, a manager with a 1% return when the market is down 1% will have a 
downside capture ratio of −100%.
The expressions for upside capture and downside capture are
 UC(m,B,t) = R( m,t)/R(B,t) if R( B,t) ≥ 0
 DC(m,B,t) = R( m,t)/R(B,t) if R( B,t) < 0
where
 UC( m,B,t) = upside capture for manager m relative to benchmark B for time t
 DC( m,B,t) = downside capture for manager m relative to benchmark B for time t
 R( m,t) = return of manager m for time t
 R( B,t) = return of benchmark B for time t
The upside/downside capture, or simply the capture ratio (CR), is the upside capture 
divided by the downside capture. It measures the asymmetry of return and, as such, 
is like bond convexity and option gamma. A capture ratio greater than 1 indicates 
positive asymmetry, or a convex return profile, whereas a capture ratio less than 1 
indicates negative asymmetry, or a concave return profile. Exhibit 17  illustrates what 
is meant by concave and convex return profiles. The dotted-line curve for a concave 
return profile resembles a downward-facing bowl, and the solid-line curve for a convex 
return profile resembles an upward-facing bowl. The horizontal and vertical axes are, 
respectively, benchmark returns [R( B)] and portfolio returns [R( m)]. As benchmark 
returns increase (i.e., moving to the right on the horizontal axis), portfolio returns 
increase—but at a decreasing  rate for a concave return profile and at an increasing  
rate for a convex return profile. The expression for the capture ratio is
 CR(m,B,t) = UC( m,B,t)/DC( m,B,t)
where
 CR( m,B,t) = capture ratio for manager m relative to benchmark B for time t
Exhibit 17: Convex and Concave Return Profiles
R(m)
Convex
Concave
R(B)
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 58
Consider the following return series for the manager, R( m), and the benchmark, 
R(B), shown in Exhibit 18 . The upside columns calculate the cumulative return for 
the manager, Cum R( m), and the benchmark, Cum R( B), for those periods when the 
benchmark return is positive. The downside columns calculate the cumulative returns 
when the benchmark return is negative.
Exhibit 18: Capture Ratio
t R(m) R(B)Upside Return   Downside Return
R(m) R(B) Cum R( m) Cum R( B) R(m) R(B) Cum R( m) Cum R( B)
1 0.6% 1.0% 0.6% 1.0% 0.60% 1.00%      0.00% 0.00%
2 ‒0.3% ‒0.5%     0.60% 1.00%  ‒0.3% ‒0.5% ‒0.30% ‒0.50%
3 1.0% 1.5% 1.0% 1.5% 1.61% 2.52%      ‒0.30% ‒0.50%
4 0.1% 0.2% 0.1% 0.2% 1.71% 2.72%      ‒0.30% ‒0.50%
5 ‒1.0% ‒2.0%     1.71% 2.72%  ‒1.0% ‒2.0% ‒1.30% ‒2.49%
6 0.5% 0.6% 0.5% 0.6% 2.22% 3.34%      ‒1.30% ‒2.49%
7 0.2% 0.1% 0.2% 0.1% 2.42% 3.44%      ‒1.30% ‒2.49%
8 ‒0.8% ‒1.0%     2.42% 3.44%  ‒0.8% ‒1.0% ‒2.09% ‒3.47%
9 0.8% 1.0% 0.8% 1.0% 3.24% 4.47%      ‒2.09% ‒3.47%
10 0.4% 0.5% 0.4% 0.5% 3.65% 5.00%      ‒2.09% ‒3.47%
Geometric average 0.51% 0.70%      ‒0.70% ‒1.17%    
Upside capture 0.51%/0.70% = 72.8% Downside capture ‒0.70%/‒1.17% = 59.8%
Capture ratio 72.8%/59.8% = 121.7%          
During up markets, the geometric average return is 0.51% for the manager and 0.70% 
for the benchmark, giving an upside capture of 72.8%. During down markets, the 
geometric average return is −0.70% for the manager and −1.17% for the benchmark, 
giving a downside capture of 59.8%. The manager’s capture ratio is 1.217, or 121.7%. 
Exhibit 19  shows a graph of the cumulative upside and downside returns.
Performance Appraisal: Capture Ratios and Drawdowns 59
Exhibit 19: Cumulative Upside and Downside Returns
Upside R(B) Upside R(m)
Downside R(m) Downside R(B)Cumulative Return
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
–0.01
–0.02
–0.03
–0.04
3 4 7 9 10 0 1 2 6 5 8
Time
Drawdown
Drawdown is measured as the cumulative peak-to-trough loss during a continuous 
period. Drawdown duration is the total time from the start of the drawdown until the 
cumulative drawdown recovers to zero, which can be segmented into the drawdown 
phase (start to trough) and the recovery phase (trough-to-zero cumulative return).
 Maximum DD( m,t) = min([V( m,t) − V( m,t*)]/V( m,t*), 0)
where
 V(m,t) = portfolio value of manager m at time t
 V(m,t*) = peak portfolio value of manager m
 t  > t*
Consider the return on the S&P 500 Index at the start of the global COVID-19 
outbreak (from November 2019 to February 2020, shown in Exhibit 20  and Exhibit 
21. The drawdown is 0% until January 2020, when the return is −0.04% and the draw -
down continues to worsen, reaching a maximum of −19.6% in March 2020. The strong 
positive returns from April to July 2020 reverse the drawdown. The total duration of 
the drawdown was 7 months, with a 4-month recovery period.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 60
Exhibit 20: Drawdown
Month R(m) Cumulative R( m) DrawdownCumulative 
Drawdown  
November  2019 3.63% 7.86%   0.00%  
December  2019 3.01% 11.10%   0.00%  
January 2020 ‒0.04% 11.05% ‒0.04% ‒0.04%  Drawdown begins
February  2020 ‒8.23% 1.91% ‒8.23% ‒8.27%  
March 2020 ‒12.35% ‒10.67% ‒12.35% ‒19.60% Maximum drawdown
April 2020 12.82% 0.78% ‒9.30%  
May 2020 4.76% 5.58% ‒4.98%  
June 2020 1.99% 7.67% ‒3.09%  
July 2020 5.64% 13.75% 0.00% Recovery begins
Exhibit 21: Drawdown
Cumulative R(m) Cumulative DrawdownPercent
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
Apr Feb Dec Feb Jun Aug Oct DecRecovery BeginsRecovery Maximum
DrawdownDrawdown
BeginsDrawdown
Recover ed
An asymmetrical return profile or avoiding large drawdowns, particularly during peri -
ods when the market is not trending strongly upward, can result in higher risk-adjusted 
returns. The reason is the all-too-familiar reality for investors that it takes propor -
tionally larger gains to recover from increasingly large losses. This asymmetry arises 
from basis drift, from the change in the denominator when calculating returns, or 
from the practical problem of recovering from a smaller asset base after a large loss. 
For example, a portfolio decline of 50% must be followed by a gain of 100% to return 
to its previous value. Exhibit 22  illustrates this relationship.
Performance Appraisal: Capture Ratios and Drawdowns 61
Exhibit 22: Percentage Gain Necessary to Offset a Given Loss
Gain Per centPercent
Loss Per centPercent
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
–100
0 –90 –20 –10 –30 –50 –60 –80 –40 –700
To further illustrate, consider the four return profiles with different upside and down -
side capture ratios shown in Exhibit 23 .
Exhibit 23: Return Profile Summary
Profile Upside Capture Downside Capture Ratio
Long only 100% 100% 1.0
Positive asymmetry 75% 25% 3.0
Low beta 50% 50% 1.0
Negative asymmetry 25% 75% 0.3
We designed these four trading strategies to illustrate the potential effects of the cap -
ture ratio and drawdown on return performance and to highlight why understanding 
the capture ratio and drawdown is important for manager selection.8 Each strategy’s 
allocation to the S&P 500 Total Return (TR) Index and to 90-day T-bills (assuming 
monthly rebalancing to simplify the calculations) is based on the realized monthly 
return from January 2000 to December 2013. (We chose this time period to illustrate 
the need to examine the asymmetry in a strategy’s returns specifically because it 
encompasses the extreme drawdown of 2008–2009.)
 ■The long-only profile is 100% allocated to the S&P 500 throughout the 
period.
 ■The low-beta profile is allocated 50% to the S&P 500 throughout the period.
 ■The positive asymmetry profile is allocated 75% to the S&P 500 for months 
when the S&P 500 return is positive and 25% when the S&P 500 return is 
negative.
8 If the market return is known beforehand, the correct strategy is to allocate 100% to the S&P 500 Total 
Return (TR) Index in up months and 100% to 90-day T-bills in down months (or −100% S&P 500 TR Index 
if shorting is allowed).
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 62
 ■The negative asymmetry profile is allocated 25% to the S&P 500 for months 
when the S&P 500 return is positive and 75% when the S&P 500 return is 
negative.
The remainder for all profiles is allocated to 90-day T-bills. Exhibit 24  shows each 
profile’s cumulative monthly return for the period.
Exhibit 24: Each Profile’s Cumulative Monthly Return, January 2000–
December 2013
0
Positive Asymmetry Negative Asymmetry
Low Beta (50%) Long OnlyCumulative Return (%)
250
200
150
100
50
–50
–100
00 03 01 02 04 05 06 08 09 11 12 13 07 10
Exhibit 25  provides summary statistics for each profile based on monthly returns 
from January 2000 to December 2013. Although the long-only profile outperformed 
the low-beta profile, this outperformance resulted from the strong up market of 2013. 
The low-beta profile outperformed the long-only profile for most of the period, with 
lower realized volatility and higher risk-adjusted returns during the entire period. 
The low-beta profile declined only 18.8%, compared with the long-only decline of 
42.5%, from January 2000 to September 2002. As a result, the low-beta profile had 
higher cumulative performance from January 2000 to October 2007 despite markedly 
lagging the long-only profile (56.0% to 108.4%) from October 2002 to October 2007.
Although a low-beta approach may sacrifice performance, it shows that limiting 
drawdowns can result in better absolute and risk-adjusted returns in certain markets. 
Not surprisingly, positive asymmetry results in better performance relative to long 
only, low beta, and negative asymmetry. Although the positive asymmetry profile lags 
in up markets, this lag is more than offset by the lower participation in down markets. 
Not surprisingly, the negative asymmetry profile lags, with lower participation in up 
markets insufficient to offset the greater participation in down markets.
Performance Appraisal: Capture Ratios and Drawdowns 63
Exhibit 25: Summary Statistics for Each Profile, January 2000–December 
2013
Strategy Long Only Low BetaPositive 
AsymmetryNegative 
Asymmetry
Cumulative return 64.0% 54.2% 228.1% −24.4%
Annualized return 3.60% 3.14% 8.86% −1.98%
Annualized standard 
deviation15.64% 7.79% 9.61% 10.01%
Sharpe ratio 0.10 0.14 0.71 −0.40
Beta 1.00 0.50 0.61 0.64
Drawdown (maximum) −50.9% −28.3% −26.9% −48.9%
Although positive asymmetry is a desirable trait, only some strategies are convex. We 
need to understand the strategy and how the return profile is created, particularly 
whether the strategy is inherently convex or whether convexity relies on manager skill. 
For example, a hedging strategy implemented by rolling forward out-of-the-money put 
options will typically return many small losses because more options expire worthless 
than are compensated for by the occasional large gain during a large market downturn. 
This strategy will likely exhibit consistent positive asymmetry because it depends more 
on the nature of the strategy than on investment skill. 
We should also evaluate the consistency between the stated investment process 
and reported investment performance. An inconsistency could indicate issues with the 
strategy’s repeatability and implementation or more serious reporting and compliance 
concerns. Capture ratios can be useful in evaluating consistency issues. We also need 
to understand the strategy’s robustness and potential risks. For example, the expected 
benefits of diversification—in particular, mitigating downside capture—might not be 
realized in a crisis if correlations converge toward 1.
Manager responses to a large drawdown provide evidence of the robustness and 
repeatability of the investment, portfolio construction, and risk management processes, 
as well as insight into the people implementing the processes. This information requires 
an understanding of the source of the drawdown and the potential principal–agent 
risk, operational risk, and business risk that it entails. Drawdowns are stress tests of 
the investment process and provide a natural point to evaluate and improve processes, 
which is particularly true of firm-specific drawdowns.
As noted, practitioners should also consider investment horizon and its relation -
ship with risk capacity. An investor closer to retirement, with less time to recover 
from losses, places more emphasis on absolute measures of risk. In addition, even 
if the manager maintains her discipline during a large drawdown, the investor may 
not. This dynamic arises if the investor’s perception of risk is path dependent or the 
drawdown changes risk tolerance. If there has been no change to investment policy 
and no change in the view that the manager remains suitable, the temptation to exit 
should be resisted to avoid exiting at an inauspicious time. Investors with shorter 
horizons, with lower risk capacity, or who are prone to overreact to losses may bias 
selection toward managers with shallower and shorter expected drawdowns.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 64
EXAMPLE 13
Capture Ratios and Drawdown
1. Do losses require proportionally greater gains to reverse or offset? Choose 
the best response.
A. Yes, because in investing, it is easier to lose than to gain.
B. No, gains should reflect losses.
C. Yes, because we calculate percentage gains/losses on the basis of the 
starting amount of portfolio holdings.
Solution:
C is the correct response. If the denominator of the gain calculation is lower, 
a higher percentage gain is required to offset the loss. For example, if you 
lose 10% of $100, your new holding is $90. To earn back the $10 loss, you 
must earn 10/90, or 11%. A is not correct because the “ease” of gaining or 
losing is not relevant. B is not correct because proportionally higher gains 
are required.
 
t R(m) (%) R(B) (%)
1 −3.06 −3.60
2 6.32 3.10
3 6.00 6.03
4 3.21 1.58
5 −9.05 −7.99
6 −4.09 −5.23
7 4.34 7.01
8 −5.72 −4.51
9 12.76 8.92
10 5.38 3.81
11 0.33 0.01
12 5.68 6.68
 
2. Using the return information in the table above, what is the manager’s 
downside capture ratio?
A. 103%
B. 108%
C. 115%
Solution:
A is the correct answer. See the table below.
 
t R(m) R(B)Upside Return   Downside Return
R(m) R(B) Cum R( m) Cum R( B) R(m) R(B) Cum R( m) Cum R( B)
1 ‒3.06% ‒3.60%     0.00% 0.00%  ‒3.06% ‒3.60% ‒3.06% ‒3.60%
2 6.32% 3.10% 6.32% 3.10% 6.32% 3.10%      ‒3.06% ‒3.60%
3 6.00% 6.03% 6.00% 6.03% 12.70% 9.32%      ‒3.06% ‒3.60%
Evaluation of Investment Manager Skill 65
t R(m) R(B)Upside Return   Downside Return
R(m) R(B) Cum R( m) Cum R( B) R(m) R(B) Cum R( m) Cum R( B)
4 3.21% 1.58% 3.21% 1.58% 16.32% 11.04%      ‒3.06% ‒3.60%
5 ‒9.05% ‒7.99%     16.32% 11.04%  ‒9.05% ‒7.99% ‒11.83% ‒11.30%
6 ‒4.09% ‒5.23%     16.32% 11.04%  ‒4.09% ‒5.23% ‒15.44% ‒15.94%
7 4.34% 7.01% 4.34% 7.01% 21.36% 18.83%      ‒15.44% ‒15.94%
8 ‒5.72% ‒4.51%     21.36% 18.83%  ‒5.72% ‒4.51% ‒20.28% ‒19.73%
9 12.76% 8.92% 12.76% 8.92% 36.85% 29.43%      ‒20.28% ‒19.73%
10 5.38% 3.81% 5.38% 3.81% 44.21% 34.36%      ‒20.28% ‒19.73%
11 0.33% 0.01% 0.33% 0.01% 44.69% 34.37%      ‒20.28% ‒19.73%
12 5.68% 6.68% 5.68% 6.68% 52.91% 43.35%      ‒20.28% ‒19.73%
Geometric average 5.45% 4.60%      ‒5.51% ‒5.35%    
Upside capture 5.45%/4.60% = 118% Downside capture ‒5.51%/‒5.35% = 103%
Capture ratio 118%/103% = 115%           
 
EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT MANAGER SKILL
evaluate the skill of an investment manager
Using the tools and principles of performance evaluation presented in this reading, 
this section presents a specific case to use those tools in an evaluation of manager skill.
For this section, we will consider the case of Manager A, benchmarked against the 
MSCI Pacific Index. Drawing from the previous sections in this reading, we compiled 
sample data to evaluate the skill of Manager A. For simplicity of analysis and presen -
tation, we exclude the impact from currency.
Over a five-year period, Manager A’s performance is 9.42%, versus the benchmark 
performance of 9.25%. So, we know that the manager added 17 bps (9.42 − 9.25) of 
outperformance. But did the manager earn the 17 bps through skill, or was she the 
beneficiary of luck?
To further evaluate the outperformance, we turn to the tools presented throughout 
this reading. We include a sample attribution analysis to tell us how the outperfor -
mance was achieved. We then use appraisal ratio analysis to compare Manager A’s 
performance to other managers during the same period. Combining the analyses helps 
present a more balanced assessment of the manager’s skill.
Performance Attribution Analysis
Attribution analysis, as we have shown, is one of the most important tools for eval -
uating manager skill. Attribution will tell us how the outperformance was achieved, 
distinguishing the stock selection from country allocation. In the Exhibit 26 , we pres -
ent the sample attribution analysis (for simplicity, we have combined the interaction 
effect with stock selection).12
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 66
Exhibit 26: Sample Attribution Analysis
MarketManager A   MSCI Pacific   Attribution Effects
Total Weight5-Y ear 
Return Weight5-Y ear 
Return AllocationSelection + 
Interaction
Japan 51.0% 12.40%   60.5% 11.48%   −0.21% 0.47% 0.26%
Australia 30.0% 5.12%   25.4% 4.10%   −0.24% 0.31% 0.07%
Hong Kong SAR 15.0% 8.90%   10.0% 10.08%   0.04% −0.18% −0.14%
Singapore 3.5% 5.10%   3.0% 5.38%   −0.02% −0.01% −0.03%
New Zealand 0.5% 8.75%   1.0% 9.08%   0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
Total 100% 9.42%  100% 9.25%   −0.43% 0.59% 0.17%
Using this analysis, let us consider the impacts of country allocation weights versus 
the benchmark weights. Overall, the portfolio manager lost 43 bps of performance 
as a result of allocation decisions. Specifically, the manager’s decision to overweight 
Australia (30% to 25%) lost 24 bps, because Australia underperformed the total MSCI 
Pacific benchmark (4.10% versus 9.25%). In addition, the decision to underweight 
Japan (51% to 60%) lost 21 bps, because Japan outperformed the total benchmark 
(12.4% versus 9.25%). With this attribution analysis, we can say the manager did not 
make good weighting decisions over the five-year period.
Now, let us consider the impact from the manager’s stock selection decisions. 
Overall, the portfolio manager gained 59 bps of performance from stock selection 
decisions. Specifically, the manager added 47 bps through selecting Japanese stocks 
and 31 bps from selecting Australian stocks. Stock selection in Hong Kong SAR was 
not as successful, where the manager lost 18 bps.
Overall, we can conclude from the attribution analysis that the manager is a good 
stock picker, especially for Japanese and Australian stocks. But the manager has not 
been as successful in choosing the markets to allocate assets. We infer these conclusions 
on the basis of an analysis of the manager’s performance attribution over a five-year 
period. To better evaluate the manager’s performance, we need to understand the 
risk incurred to achieve that performance. For that risk assessment, we will consider 
Manager A relative to other managers, using a sample appraisal ratio analysis over 
the same five-year period.
Appraisal Measures
As described previously, appraisal analysis uses techniques to review past periods of 
performance and risk. Consider the sample results presented in Exhibit 27 . For the 
same five-year period, we have calculated a set of performance appraisal measures 
for Manager A, presented previously, as well as two other managers with the same 
benchmark over the same period, Managers B and C.
Exhibit 27: Sample Analysis Using Various Appraisal Measures
  Appraisal Measures
Manager A Manager B Manager C Benchmark
Annualized return 9.42 8.23 10.21 9.25
Annualized std. dev. 10.83 8.10 12.34 9.76
Evaluation of Investment Manager Skill 67
  Appraisal Measures
Manager A Manager B Manager C Benchmark
Sharpe ratio 0.68 0.76 0.66 0.73
Treynor ratio 0.35 0.32 0.19 0.57
Information ratio 0.43 0.41 0.30 0.00
Sortino ratio  (MAR = 3%) 0.82 0.51 1.03 0.97
In considering this historical analysis, note that Manager A has a higher volatility of 
returns than the benchmark (manager standard deviation of 10.83 versus benchmark 
standard deviation of 9.76). This volatility is greater than that for Manager B (8.10) 
but is less than that for Manager C (12.34). In general, Manager A’s return is slightly 
more volatile—riskier—than the benchmark’s and slightly more and less volatile than 
that of Managers B and C, respectively.
This consistency is demonstrated in the Sharpe ratio measurement as well. Recall 
that the Sharpe ratio indicates the amount of performance earned over a risk-free 
proxy per unit of risk. In this assessment, Manager A’s Sharpe ratio is less than the 
benchmark’s Sharpe ratio (0.68 versus 0.73) and less than Manager B’s Sharpe ratio 
(0.76). Thus, for this period, we know Manager A certainly incurred more risk than 
the benchmark and Manager B did for the same amount of return generated. Is the 
manager incurring too much risk for the return generated? To answer this question, 
we should consider some of the other appraisal measures as well.
Unlike the Sharpe ratio, the Treynor ratio measures the return earned per unit of 
systematic  risk. The information ratio indicates how well the manager has performed 
relative to the benchmark, after accounting for the differences in the volatility of the 
portfolio and the benchmark.  Given that Manager A has the highest Treynor and infor -
mation ratios for this period, she has been able to produce a higher return relative to 
systematic risk. In addition, consider her Sortino ratio of 0.82, not significantly higher 
than the Sharpe ratio, but again indicative of an ability to generate higher returns 
relative to downside risk (where the target is 3%).
Sample Evaluation of Skill
In summary, the analysis based on these appraisal measures supports the conclusion 
generated by the performance attribution analysis that Manager A has been able to 
generate excess return over the benchmark through stock selection. She has done so 
without incurring significant excess risk relative to the benchmark and two similar 
managers. Therefore, within the limits of these analyses, Manager A has exhibited 
some level of skill worthy of further analysis.
The analysis does not, however, help us evaluate the country allocation conclusions 
of our attribution analysis. We know that the manager made incorrect bets in Japan 
and Australia. What beliefs about country selection are embedded in her investment 
philosophy? Are country allocations an integral part of her investment approach, or 
are they a by-product of her stock selection? Answers to these questions will help us 
determine whether our assessment of skill should be penalized by the poor outcomes 
of the country selection decisions in this period.
It is important to recognize that our analysis encompasses only a small sample 
of the possible outcomes that are not necessarily indicative of future outcomes. A 
long track record is necessary to have any statistical certainty in a conclusion of skill 
or no skill. Practitioners will want to conduct additional analyses to increase their 
confidence in their conclusions. These additional studies could include some of the 
other tools presented in this reading, such as risk attribution or ex ante  analyses. In 
addition, practitioners will want to include qualitative analyses of the manager (e.g., 
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 68
direct interviews with management to assess abilities), assessment of investment goals 
and management fees, and so on. In the end, we must understand and acknowledge 
the limits of all tools, being careful to qualify any conclusions regarding investment 
skill with the appropriate level of prudence.
EXAMPLE 14
Investment Manager Skill
Use the examples in Exhibit 26  and Exhibit 27  to help answer the following 
questions.
1. Which statement best describes Manager A’s performance during this five-
year period?
A. On an absolute basis, Manager A performed better than either 
Manager B or Manager C.
B. Relative to systematic risk, Manager A performed better than either 
Manager B or Manager C.
C. Manager C incurred the least risk.
Solution:
B is correct. The Treynor ratio measures performance relative to systematic 
risk. Manager A’s Treynor ratio was better than that of both Manager B and 
Manager C for the period. A is not correct because Manager A’s return for 
the period was less than Manager C’s return. C is not correct because Man -
ager C’s annualized standard deviation (volatility) was highest.
2. Which of the following best provides evidence of manager skill?
A. Security selection attribution effect of 47 bps
B. Annualized performance equal to 9.42%
C. Annualized standard deviation equal to 12.34%
Solution:
A is correct. Performance attribution can be indicative of manager skill, 
especially over longer historical time periods. Neither B nor C is correct 
because neither performance nor standard deviation, on their own, is neces -
sarily indicative of manager skill.
3. How can a practitioner best distinguish manager skill from luck?
A. Run thousands of analyses of the same manager over an extended 
period.
B. Avoid making broad-based judgments without statistical evidence.
C. Use multiple analysis tools to jointly infer conclusions, sensitive to the 
limits of those tools.
Solution:
C is correct. Practitioners should use multiple analyses with different tools 
to find multiple sources that agree on evidence of skill. A is not correct, be -
cause thousands of analyses, especially the same types of analyses, may not 
necessarily lead to more conclusive results. B is not correct because it states 
best practice but not necessarily techniques to distinguish skill from luck.
Evaluation of Investment Manager Skill 69
SUMMARY
Performance evaluation is an essential tool for understanding the quality of the invest -
ment process. Practitioners must take care, however, to understand how performance 
results are generated. They need a good understanding of the performance methods 
used, the data inputs, and the limitations of those methods. They particularly need to 
be careful not to infer results beyond the capabilities of the methods or the accuracy 
of the data. In this reading, we have discussed the following:
 ■Performance measurement provides an overall indication of the portfolio’s 
performance.
 ■Performance attribution builds on performance measurement to explain 
how the performance was achieved.
 ■Performance appraisal leverages both returns and attribution to infer the 
quality of the investment process.
 ■An effective attribution process must reconcile to the total portfolio return/
risk, reflect the investment decision-making process, quantify the active 
portfolio management decisions, and provide a complete understanding of 
the excess return/risk of the portfolio.
 ■Return attribution analyzes the impact of investment decisions on the 
returns, whereas risk attribution analyzes the risk consequences of the 
investment decisions.
 ■Macro attribution considers the decisions of the fund sponsor, whereas 
micro attribution considers the decisions of the individual portfolio 
manager.
 ■Returns-based attribution uses returns to identify the factors that have gen -
erated those returns.
 ■Holdings-based attribution uses the holdings over time to evaluate the deci -
sions that contributed to the returns.
 ■Transactions-based attribution uses both holdings and transactions to fully 
explain the performance over the evaluation period.
 ■There are various techniques for interpreting the sources of portfolio returns 
using a specified attribution approach.
 ■Fixed-income attribution considers the unique factors that drive bond 
returns, including interest rate risk and default risk.
 ■When selecting a risk attribution approach, practitioners should consider 
the investment decision-making process and the type of attribution analysis.
 ■Attribution is used to calculate and interpret the contribution to portfolio 
return and volatility from the asset allocation and within-asset-class active/
passive decisions.
 ■Liability-based benchmarks focus on the cash flows that the assets are 
required to generate.
 ■Asset-based benchmarks contain a collection of assets to compare against 
the portfolio’s assets.
 ■Valid benchmarks should be unambiguous, investable, measurable, appro -
priate, reflective of current investment opinions, specified in advance, and 
accountable.
 ■Benchmark misspecification creates subsequent incorrect performance 
measurement and invalidates the attribution and appraisal analyses.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 70
 ■Alternative investments are difficult to benchmark because they are typ -
ically less liquid, have fewer available market benchmarks, and often lack 
transparency.
 ■Investment performance appraisal ratios—including the Sortino ratio, 
upside/downside capture ratios, maximum drawdown, and drawdown 
duration—measure investment skill.
 ■Appraisal ratios must be used with care, noting the assumptions of each 
ratio and affording the appropriateness to the measured investment process, 
risk tolerance, and investor time horizon.
 ■Although appraisal ratios help identify manager skill (as opposed to luck), 
they often are based on investment return data, which are often limited and 
subject to error.
 ■Evaluation of investment manager skill requires the use of a broad range of 
analysis tools, with fundamental understanding of how the tools work, how 
they complement each other, and their specific limitations.
References 71
REFERENCES
Bailey, Jeffery V. and David E. Tierney. 1998. Controlling Misfit Risk in Multiple-Manager 
Investment Programs. Charlottesville, VA: Research Foundation of CFA Institute.
Bailey, Jeffery V., Thomas M. Richards, and David Tierney. 2007. “Evaluating Portfolio 
Performance. ” In Managing Investment Portfolios: A Dynamic Process. 3rd ed., ed. Maginn, 
John, Donald Tuttle, Dennis McLeavey, Jerald Pinto. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Brinson, Gary and Nimrod Fachler. 1985. “Measuring Non-US Equity Portfolio Performance. ” 
Journal of Portfolio Management 11 (5): 73–76. 10.3905/jpm.1985.409005
Brinson, Gary, Randolph Hood, and Gilbert Beebower. 1986. “Determinants of Portfolio 
Performance. ” Financial Analysts Journal  42 (4): 39–44. 10.2469/faj.v42.n4.39
Brown, Stephen and William Goetzmann. 1997. “Mutual Fund Styles. ” Journal of Financial 
Economics  43 (3): 373–99. 10.1016/S0304-405X(96)00898-7
Carhart, M. M. 1997. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance. ” Journal of Finance  52 (1): 
57–82. 10.1111/j.1540-6261.1997.tb03808.x
Cariño, David. 1999. “Combining Attribution Effects over Time. ” Journal of Performance 
Measurement  (Summer).
Giguère, C. 2005. “Thinking through Fixed Income Attribution—Reflections from a Group of 
French Practitioners. ” Journal of Performance Measurement  (Summer): 46–65.
Menchero, Jose. 2000. “ An Optimized Approach to Linking Attribution Effects over Time. ” 
Journal of Performance Measurement  (Fall).
Murira, Bernard and Hector Sierra. 2006. “Fixed Income Attribution: A United Framework—
Part 1. ” Journal of Performance Measurement  11 (1): 23–35.
Treynor, J. 1965. “How to Rate Management of Investment Funds. ” Harvard Business Review  43 
(1): 63–75.
Treynor, J. and F. Black. 1973. “How to Use Security Analysis to Improve Portfolio Selection. ” 
Journal of Business  46 (1): 66–86. 10.1086/295508
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 72
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions 
1-5
Alexandra Jones, a senior adviser at Federalist Investors (FI), meets with Erin 
Bragg, a junior analyst. Bragg just completed a monthly performance evalua -
tion for an FI fixed-income manager. Bragg’s report addresses the three primary 
components of performance evaluation: measurement, attribution, and appraisal. 
Jones asks Bragg to describe an effective attribution process. Bragg responds as 
follows:
Response 1: Performance attribution draws conclusions regarding the quality 
of a portfolio manager’s investment decisions.
Response 2: Performance attribution should help explain how performance 
was achieved by breaking apart the return or risk into different 
explanatory components.
Bragg notes that the fixed-income portfolio manager has strong views about 
the effects of macroeconomic factors on credit markets and follows a top-down 
investment process.
Jones reviews the monthly performance attribution and asks Bragg whether any 
risk-adjusted historical performance indicators are available. Bragg produces the 
following data:
Exhibit 1: 10-Y ear Trailing Risk-Adjusted Performance
Average annual return 8.20%
Minimum acceptable return (MAR) 5.00%
Sharpe ratio 0.95
Sortino ratio 0.87
Upside capture 0.66
Downside capture 0.50
Maximum drawdown −24.00%
Drawdown duration 4 months
1. Which of Bragg’s responses regarding effective performance attribution is 
correct?
A. Only Response 1
B. Only Response 2
C. Both Response 1 and Response 2
2. The most appropriate  risk attribution approach for the fixed-income manager is 
to:
A. decompose historical returns into a top-down factor framework.
Practice Problems 73
B. evaluate the marginal contribution to total risk for each position.
C. attribute tracking risk to relative allocation and selection decisions.
3. Based on Exhibit 1, the target semideviation for the portfolio is closest to:
A. 2.78%.
B. 3.68%.
C. 4.35%.
4. Based on Exhibit 1, the capture ratios of the portfolio indicate:
A. a concave return profile.
B. positive asymmetry of returns.
C. that the portfolio generates higher returns than the benchmark during all 
market conditions.
5. The maximum drawdown and drawdown duration in Exhibit 1 indicate that:
A. the portfolio recovered quickly from its maximum loss.
B. over the 10-year period, the average maximum loss was −24.00%.
C. a significant loss once persisted for four months before the portfolio began 
to recover.
The following information relates to questions 
6-14
Stephanie Tolmach is a consultant hired to create a performance attribution 
report on three funds held by a defined benefit pension plan (the Plan). Fund 1 
is a domestic equity strategy, Fund 2 is a global equity strategy, and Fund 3 is a 
domestic fixed-income strategy.
Tolmach uses three approaches to attribution analysis: the return-based, 
holdings-based, and transaction-based approaches. The Plan’s investment 
committee asks Tolmach to (1) apply the attribution method that uses 
only each fund’s total portfolio returns over the last 12 months to identify 
return-generating components of the investment process and (2) include the im -
pact of specific active investment decisions and the attribution effects of alloca -
tion and security selection in the report.
Tolmach first evaluates the performance of Fund 1 by constructing a Carhart 
factor model; the results are presented in Exhibit 1.
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 74
Exhibit 1: Fund 1 Factor Model Attribution
 Factor Sensitivity  Contribution to Active 
Return
Factor*Portfo -
lio 
(1)Bench -
mark  
(2)Difference  
(3)Factor Return  
(4)Absolute  
(3) × (4)Proportion of 
Active Return
RMRF 1.22 0.91 0.31 16.32% 5.06% −126.80%
SMB 0.59 0.68 −0.09 −3.25% 0.29% −7.33%
HML −0.17 0.04 −0.21 −9.60% 2.02% −50.53%
WML −0.05 0.07 −0.12 3.38% −0.41% 10.17%
      A. Factor Tilt Return: 6.96% −174.49%
      B. Security Selection: −10.95% 274.49%
    C. Active Return (A + B): −3.99% 100.00%
* RMRF is the return on a value-weighted equity index in excess of the one-month T-bill rate, SMB is the 
small minus big market capitalization factor, HML is the high minus low factor, and WML is the winners 
minus losers factor.
Tolmach turns her attention to Fund 2, constructing a region-based, Brinson–
Fachler micro attribution analysis to evaluate the active decisions of the portfolio 
manager. The results are presented in Exhibit 2.
Exhibit 2: Fund 2 Performance—Allocation by Region
Return Attribution  
(Region Level)Portfolio 
WeightBenchmark 
WeightPortfolio 
ReturnBenchmark 
Return
North America 10.84% 7.67% 16.50% 16.47%
Greater Europe 38.92% 42.35% 23.16% 25.43%
Developed Asia and 
Australasia29.86% 31.16% 11.33% 12.85%
South America 20.38% 18.82% 20.00% 35.26%
Total 100.00% 100.00% 18.26% 22.67%
Next, Tolmach evaluates Fund 3 and the appropriateness of its benchmark. The 
benchmark is a cap-weighted bond index with daily reported performance; the 
index is rebalanced frequently, making it difficult to replicate. The benchmark has 
a meaningful investment in foreign bonds, whereas Fund 3 invests only in domes -
tic bonds.
In the final section of the report, Tolmach reviews the entire Plan’s characteris -
tics, asset allocation, and benchmark. Tolmach observes that the Plan’s benefits 
are no longer indexed to inflation and that the workforce is, on average, younger 
than it was when the current fund allocations were approved. Tolmach recom -
mends a change in the Plan’s asset allocation policy.
6. Of the three attribution approaches referenced by Tolmach, the method request -
ed by the committee:
A. is the least accurate.
B. uses the underlying holdings of the actual portfolio.
Practice Problems 75
C. is the most difficult and time consuming to implement.
7. Based on Exhibit 1 and relative to the benchmark, the manager of Fund 1 most 
likely  used a:
A. growth tilt.
B. greater tilt toward small cap.
C. momentum-based investing approach.
8. Based on Exhibit 1, which of the following factors contributed the least  to active 
return?
A. HML
B. SMB
C. RMRF
9. Based on Exhibit 1, the manager could have delivered more value to the portfolio 
during the investment period by weighting more toward:
A. value stocks.
B. small-cap stocks.
C. momentum stocks.
10. Based on Exhibit 2, the allocation effect for South America is closest  to:
A. −0.04%.
B. 0.03%.
C. 0.20%.
11. Based on Exhibit 2, the decision to overweight or underweight which of the fol -
lowing regions contributed positively to performance at the overall fund level?
A. North America
B. Greater Europe
C. Developed Asia and Australasia
12. Based on Exhibit 2, the underperformance at the overall fund level is predomi -
nantly the result of poor security selection decisions in:
A. South America.
B. greater Europe.
C. developed Asia and Australasia.
13. The benchmark for Fund 3 has which of the following characteristics of a valid 
benchmark?
A. Investable
B. Measurable
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 76
C. Appropriate
14. Based on the final section of Tolmach’s report, the Plan should use:
A. a liability-based benchmark.
B. an absolute return benchmark.
C. a manager universe benchmark.
Solutions 77
SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct. Performance attribution helps explain how performance was 
achieved; it breaks apart the return or risk into different explanatory compo -
nents. Effective performance attribution must account for all of the portfolio’s 
return or risk exposure, reflect the investment decision-making process, quantify 
the active decisions of the portfolio manager, and provide a complete under -
standing of the excess return/risk of the portfolio.
2. C is correct. The portfolio is managed against a benchmark, which indicates a 
relative-risk type of risk attribution analysis. For a top-down investment ap -
proach, the analysis should attribute tracking risk to allocation and selection 
decisions relative to the benchmark.
3. B is correct. The target semi-standard deviation or target semideviation is the de -
nominator of the Sortino ratio. The numerator of the Sortino ratio is the average 
portfolio return minus the target rate of return (minimum acceptable return, or 
MAR).
  Sortino ratio  =    (  Average portfolio return  − MAR  )     ________________________   Target semideviation   
Substituting the values provided in Exhibit 3, the target semideviation is as 
follows:
   Target semideviation  =   8.20 %  − 5.00%  ____________  0.87       
= 3.678  %  = 3.68%   
4. B is correct. The upside/downside capture, or simply the capture ratio (CR), is the 
upside capture ratio divided by the downside capture ratio.
 (Upside capture)/(Downside capture) = 0.66/0.50 = 1.32.
A capture ratio greater than 1 indicates positive asymmetry of returns, or a con -
vex return profile.
5. A is correct. Maximum drawdown is the cumulative peak-to-trough loss during 
a continuous period. Drawdown duration is the total time from the start of 
the drawdown until the cumulative drawdown recovers to zero, which can be 
segmented into the drawdown phase (start to trough) and the recovery phase 
(trough to zero cumulative return). The maximum drawdown was −24.00%, with 
a drawdown period of four months. Given the 10-year time frame, the portfolio 
recovered quickly from its maximum loss.
6. A is correct. The committee described a return-based attribution, which is 
the least accurate of the three approaches (the return-based, holdings-based, 
transaction-based approaches). Return-based attribution uses only the total port -
folio returns over a period to identify the components of the investment process 
that have generated the returns.
7. A is correct. Based on the factor sensitivities in column 1 (negative sensitivity of 
−0.17 to HML) and the differences relative to the benchmark shown in column 3, 
the manager likely had a growth tilt.
8. B is correct. With an absolute return of 0.29% and with 7.33% of the contribution 
to return, SMB contributed far less than HML (2.02% and 50.53%, respectively) 
and RMRF (5.06% and 126.80%, respectively).
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 78
9. C is correct. Had the manager weighted more toward momentum stocks during 
the period, the momentum factor (WML) return of 3.38% would have contribut -
ed positively to the portfolio.
A is incorrect because the HML factor return was −9.60%; thus, weighting more 
toward value stocks would have detracted from portfolio returns.
B is incorrect because the SMB factor return was −3.25%; thus, weighting more 
toward small-cap stocks would have detracted from portfolio returns.
10. C is correct. The allocation effect for South America is 0.20%.
 Allocation = ( wi − Wi)(Bi − B)
  = (20.38% − 18.82%)(35.26 − 22.67%)
  = 0.1964% = 0.20%
11. C is correct. The decision to underweight developed Asia and Australasia was 
a good one because the benchmark for this region underperformed the total 
benchmark (12.85% versus 22.67%). Alternatively, the question can be answered 
by calculating the allocation effects for the three regions, as follows:
 Allocation = ( wi − Wi)(Bi − B)
 North America = (10.84% − 7.67%)(16.47% − 22.67%)
  = −0.20%
 Greater Europe = (38.92% − 42.35%)(25.43% − 22.67%)
  = −0.09%
 Developed Asia and Australasia = (29.86% − 31.16%)(12.85% − 22.67%)
  = 0.13%
Developed Asia and Australasia is the only region of the three that had a positive 
allocation effect.
12. A is correct. The total −441 bps of underperformance from security selection 
and interaction at the overall fund level is predominantly the result of poor South 
American security selection decisions (−311 bps = 3.11%).
Return Attribution (Segment 
Level) AllocationSelection + 
Interaction Total
North America −0.1966% 0.0033% −0.1934%
Greater Europe −0.0946% −0.8835% −0.9781%
Developed Asia and Australasia 0.1277% −0.4539% −0.3262%
Solutions 79
Return Attribution (Segment 
Level) AllocationSelection + 
Interaction Total
South America 0.1964% −3.1100% −2.9136%
Total 0.0329% −4.4441% −4.4112%
 Allocation = ( wi − Wi)(Bi − B)
 North America = (10.84% − 7.67%)(16.47% − 22.67%)
  = −0.20%
 Greater Europe = (38.92% − 42.35%)(25.43% − 22.67%)
  = −0.09%
 Developed Asia and Australasia = (29.86% − 31.16%)(12.85% − 22.67%)
  = 0.13%
 South America = (20.38% − 18.82%)(35.26% − 22.67%)
  = 0.20%
 Selection + Interaction = Wi(Ri − Bi) + (wi − Wi)(Ri − Bi)
 North America = 7.67%(16.50% − 16.47%) + (10.84% − 7.67%)
(16.50% − 16.47%)
  = 0.00%
 Greater Europe = 42.35%(23.16% − 25.43%) + (38.92% − 
42.35%)(23.16% − 25.43%) 
  = −0.88%
 Developed Asia and Australasia = 31.16%(11.33% − 12.85%) + (29.86% − 
31.16%)(11.33% − 12.85%)
  = −0.45%
 South America = 18.82%(20.00% − 35.26%) + (20.38% − 
18.82%)(20.00% − 35.26%)
  = −3.11%
13. B is correct. Daily reported performance is available for the benchmark; thus, it is 
possible to measure the benchmark’s return on a reasonably frequent and timely 
basis.
A is incorrect because the benchmark is a cap-weighted bond index that is 
rebalanced frequently, making it difficult to replicate. For a benchmark to be 
investable, it must be possible to replicate and hold the benchmark to earn its 
return (at least gross of expenses). The sponsor should have the option of moving 
assets from active management to a passive benchmark. If the benchmark is not 
investable, it is not a viable investment alternative. Bond indexes are often not 
investable and are rebalanced frequently over time.
C is incorrect because the index has a meaningful investment in foreign bonds, 
whereas Fund 3 invests only in domestic bonds, making the benchmark inappro -
priate. The benchmark must be consistent with the manager’s investment style or 
Learning Module 1 Portfolio Performance Evaluation 80
area of expertise.
14. A is correct. Based on the Plan’s type (defined benefit) and its characteristics as 
detailed in the final section of Tolmach’s report, a liability-based benchmark is 
most appropriate. Liability-based benchmarks are used most frequently when 
assets are required to pay a specific future liability, as in a defined benefit pension 
plan.
Investment Manager Selection
by Jeffrey C. Heisler, PhD, CFA, and Donald W . Lindsey, CFA.
Jeffrey C. Heisler, PhD, CFA, is at TwinFocus Capital Partners (USA). Donald W. Lindsey, 
CFA (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
describe the components of a manager selection process, including 
due diligence
contrast Type I and Type II errors in manager hiring and 
continuation decisions
describe uses of returns-based and holdings-based style analysis in 
investment manager selection
describe uses of the upside capture ratio, downside capture ratio, 
maximum drawdown, drawdown duration, and up/down capture in 
evaluating managers
evaluate a manager’s investment philosophy and investment 
decision-making process
discuss how behavioral factors affect investment team decision 
making, and recommend techniques for mitigating their effects
evaluate the costs and benefits of pooled investment vehicles and 
separate accounts
compare types of investment manager contracts, including their 
major provisions and advantages and disadvantages
describe the three basic forms of performance-based fees
analyze and interpret a sample performance-based fee schedule
INTRODUCTION
Most investors do not hold securities directly but rather invest using intermediaries. 
Whether the intermediary is a separately managed account or a pooled investment 
vehicle, such as a UCITS (undertakings for collective investment in transferable secu -
rities) fund, a hedge fund, a private equity fund, or an exchange-traded fund (ETF), 1LEARNING MODULE
2
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 82
a professional investment manager is entrusted with helping investors achieve their 
investment objectives. In all these cases, the selection of appropriate investment 
managers is a challenge with important financial consequences.
Evaluating an investment manager is a complex and detailed process that encom -
passes a great deal more than analyzing investment returns. The investigation and 
analysis in support of an investment action, decision, or recommendation is called 
due diligence . In conducting investment manager due diligence, the focus is on 
understanding how the investment results were achieved and on assessing the likeli -
hood that the investment process that generated these returns will produce superior 
or at least satisfactory investment results going forward. Due diligence also entails 
an evaluation of a firm’s integrity, operations, and personnel. As such, due diligence 
involves both quantitative and qualitative analysis.
This learning module provides a framework that introduces and describes the 
important elements of the manager selection process. Although it is important to 
have a well-defined methodology, this learning module is not intended to be a rigid 
checklist, a step-by-step guide, or an in-depth analysis but rather to present a structure 
from which the reader can develop their own approach.
We assume that the investment policy statement (IPS) has been drafted, the asset 
allocation determined, and the decision to use an outside adviser has been made. As 
a result, the focus is on determining which manager offers the “best” means to imple -
ment or express those decisions. The discussion has three broad topics:
 ■Outlining a framework for identifying, evaluating, and ultimately selecting 
investment managers.
 ■Quantitative considerations in manager selection.
 ■Qualitative considerations in manager selection.
The learning module concludes with a summary of selected important points.
A FRAMEWORK FOR INVESTMENT MANAGER SEARCH 
AND SELECTION
describe the components of a manager selection process, including 
due diligence
An underlying assumption of investment manager due diligence is that a consistent, 
robust investment process will generate a similar return distribution relative to risk 
factors through time, assuming the underlying dynamics of the market have not 
dramatically changed. One important goal of manager due diligence is to understand 
whether the manager’s investment process, people, and portfolio construction satisfy 
this assumption—that is, will the investment process generate the expected return 
from the expected sources? The manager search and selection process has three broad 
components: the universe, a quantitative analysis of the manager’s performance track 
record, and a qualitative analysis of the manager’s investment process. The qualitative 
analysis consists of investment due diligence, which evaluates the manager’s investment 
process, and operational due diligence, which evaluates the manager’s infrastructure 
and firm. Exhibit 1  details these components.2
A Framework for Investment Manager Search and Selection 83
Exhibit 1: Manager Selection Process Overview
Key aspects Key Question
Universe
Defining the universe What is the feasible set of managers that fit the portfo -
lio need?
 ■Suitability Which managers are suitable for the IPS?
 ■Style Which have the appropriate style?
 ■Active vs. passive Which fit the active versus passive decision?
Quantitative Analysis
Investment due diligence Which manager “best” fits the portfolio need?
Quantitative What has been the manager’s return distribution?
 ■Attribution and Appraisal Has the manager displayed skill?
 ■Capture ratio How does the manager perform in “up” markets versus 
“down” markets?
 ■Drawdown Does the return distribution exhibit large drawdowns?
Qualitative Analysis
Investment due diligence Which manager “best” fits the portfolio need?
Qualitative Is the manager expected to continue to generate this 
return distribution?
 ■Philosophy What market inefficiency does the manager seek to 
exploit?
 ■Process Is the investment process capable of exploiting this 
inefficiency?
 ■People Do the investment personnel possess the expertise 
and experience necessary to effectively implement the 
investment process?
 ■Portfolio Is portfolio construction consistent with the stated 
investment philosophy and process?
Operational due diligence Is the manager’s track record accurate, and does it fully 
reflect risks?
 ■Process and procedure Is the back office strong, safeguarding assets and able to 
issue accurate reports in a timely manner?
 ■Firm Is the firm profitable, with a healthy culture, and likely 
to remain in business? Is the firm committed to deliver -
ing performance over gathering assets?
 ■Investment vehicle Is the vehicle suitable for the portfolio need?
 ■Terms Are the terms acceptable and appropriate for the strat -
egy and vehicle?
 ■Monitoring Does the manager continue to be the “best” fit for the 
portfolio need?
EXAMPLE 1
Components of the Manager Selection Process
1. Qualitative analysis of the manager selection process includes:
A. attribution.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 84
B. setting ESG objectives.
C. investment and operational due diligence.
Solution
C is correct. Qualitative analysis consists of investment due diligence, which 
evaluates the manager’s investment process, and operational due diligence, 
which evaluates the manager’s infrastructure and firm.
2. Which of the following is considered a key aspect of operational due 
diligence?
A. People
B. Philosophy
C. Procedures
Solution
C is correct. Process and procedures are key aspects of operational due 
diligence, whereas people and philosophy are key aspects of investment due 
diligence.
Defining the Manager Universe
The manager selection process begins by defining the universe of feasible managers, 
those managers that potentially satisfy the identified portfolio need. The objective is 
to reduce the manager universe to a manageable size relative to the resources and 
time available to evaluate it. This process also involves balancing the risks of too 
narrow a search, which potentially excludes interesting managers, and too broad 
a search, which leads to little gain in reducing the list of potential managers. Like 
many interesting problems, this step is a combination of art and science. In the initial 
screening process, the search parameters can be narrowed and widened to determine 
which managers enter and exit and to evaluate whether these additions or deletions 
improve the universe.
The IPS and the reason for the manager search largely determine the universe of 
managers considered and the benchmark against which they are compared. A new 
search based on a strategic or tactical view, such as adding a new strategy or risk 
exposure, will examine a broad universe of comparable managers and look to select 
the best within the universe. Adding a manager to increase capacity or diversifica -
tion within a strategy already held will look for a complement to current holdings. 
Replacing a single manager in a particular strategy will look for the best manager 
within the strategy universe. The IPS in part determines what the relative terms “best, ” 
“complement, ” and “cost/benefit” mean.
Typically, a search starts with a benchmark that represents the manager’s role within 
the portfolio. The benchmark also provides a reference for performance attribution 
and appraisal. There are several approaches to assigning a manager to a benchmark:
 ■Third-party categorization.  Database or software providers and consultants 
typically assign managers to a strategy sector. This categorization provides 
an easy and efficient way to define the universe. The risk is that the pro -
vider’s definition may differ from the desired portfolio role. As such, it is 
important to understand the criteria used by the provider.
 ■Returns-based style analysis.  The risk exposures derived from the manager’s 
actual return series has the advantage of being objective. The disadvantage 
is additional computational effort and the limitations of returns-based 
analysis.
Type I and Type II Errors in Manager Selection 85
 ■Holdings-based style analysis.  This approach allows for the estimation of 
current factor exposures but adds to computational effort and depends on 
timing and amount of transparency.
 ■Manager experience.  The assignment can be based on an evaluation of the 
manager and observations of portfolios and returns over time.
Not surprisingly, a hybrid strategy that combines elements of each approach is 
recommended. Using third-party categorizations is an efficient way to build an initial 
universe that can then be complemented and refined with quantitative methods and 
experience. The screening should avoid using performance at this point. The focus 
should be on understanding the manager’s risk profile and identifying candidates to 
fill the desired role in the portfolio. Lastly, the universe of potential managers is not 
static—it will evolve through time not only as manager strategies evolve but also as 
a result of the entry and exit of managers.
TYPE I AND TYPE II ERRORS IN MANAGER SELECTION
contrast Type I and Type II errors in manager hiring and 
continuation decisions
Certain concepts from hypothesis testing, discussed earlier in the curriculum, can 
be relevant to the decision to hire an investment manager or to retain or dismiss a 
manager previously hired.
The determination of whether a manager is skillful typically starts with the null 
hypothesis (the hypothesis assumed to be true until demonstrated otherwise) that the 
manager is not skillful. As a result, there are two types of potential error (see Exhibit 2 ):
 ■Type I: Hiring or retaining a manager who subsequently underperforms 
expectations. Rejecting the null hypothesis of no skill when it is correct; a 
false positive.
 ■Type II: Not hiring or firing a manager who subsequently outperforms, or 
performs in line with, expectations. Not rejecting the null hypothesis when 
it is incorrect; a false negative.
Exhibit 2: Type I and Type II Errors
Realization
Below expectations  
(no skill)At or above expectations  
(skill)
DecisionHire/Retain Type I Correct
Not Hire/Fire Correct Type II
Type I and Type II errors can occur anytime a decision is made regarding the hiring 
or firing of a manager. The decision maker must determine which error is preferred 
based on the expected benefits and costs of changing managers.3
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 86
Qualitative Considerations in Type I and Type II Errors
Decision makers appear predisposed to worry more about Type I errors than Type II 
errors. Potential reasons for this focus on Type I errors are as follows:
 ■Psychologically, people seek to avoid feelings of regret. Type I errors are 
mistaken rejections, whereas Type II errors are failures to detect a true 
relationship. As a result, Type I errors create explicit costs, whereas Type 
II errors create opportunity costs. Because individuals appear to put less 
weight on opportunity costs, Type I errors are psychologically more painful 
than Type II errors.
 ■Type I errors are relatively straightforward to measure and are often directly 
linked to the decision maker’s compensation. Portfolio holdings are regu -
larly monitored, and managers’ out- and underperformance expectations are 
clearly identified. Type II errors are less likely to be measured—what is the 
performance impact of not having selected a particular manager? As such, 
the link between compensation and Type II errors is less clear.
 ■Similarly, Type I errors are more transparent to investors, so they entail not 
only the regret of an incorrect decision but the pain of having to explain 
this decision to the investor. Type II errors, firing (or not hiring) a manager 
with skill, are less transparent to investors, unless the investor tracks fired 
managers or evaluates the universe themselves.
Although Type I errors are likely more familiar and more of a concern to most 
decision makers, a consistent pattern of Type II errors can highlight weaknesses in 
the manager selection process. One approach to examine this issue is to monitor not 
only managers currently held but also managers that were evaluated and not hired as 
well as managers that were fired. The goal of monitoring is to determine the following:
 ■Are there identifiable factors that differentiate managers hired and managers 
not hired?
 ■Are these factors consistent with the investment philosophy and process of 
the decision maker?
 ■Are there identifiable factors driving the decision to retain or fire managers?
 ■Are these factors consistent with the investment philosophy and process of 
the decision maker?
 ■What is the added value of the decision to retain or fire managers?
The objective is to avoid making decisions based on short-term performance (trend 
following) and to identify any evidence of behavioral biases (regret, loss aversion) in 
the evaluation of managers during the selection process.
Performance Implications of Type I and Type II Errors
The cost of Type I errors is holding a manager without skill, as opposed to the cost of 
Type II errors, which is not holding managers with skill. The cost is driven by the size, 
shape, mean, and dispersion of the return distributions of the skilled and unskilled 
managers within the universe. The smaller the difference in sample size and distribu -
tion mean and the wider the dispersion of the distributions, the smaller the expected 
cost of the Type I or Type II error. More efficient markets are likely to exhibit smaller 
differences in the distributions of skilled and unskilled managers, indicating a lower 
opportunity cost of retaining and the lower the cost of hiring an unskilled manager.
The extent to which a strategy is mean-reverting also has a bearing on the cost of 
Type I and Type II errors. If a strategy’s performance is mean reverting, firing a poor 
performer (or hiring a strong performer) only to see a reversion in performance results 
Type I and Type II Errors in Manager Selection 87
is a Type I error. A Type II error would be trimming or not hiring strong performers 
and hiring managers with weaker track records. There is evidence that individual 
investors significantly underperform the average mutual fund because of poor timing 
and fund selection decisions. A study of institutional plan sponsor allocation decisions 
found that investment products receiving contributions subsequently underperformed 
products experiencing withdrawals. The study estimated that more than $170 billion 
was lost during the period examined ( Stewart, Neumann, Knittel, and Heisler 2009 ).
EXAMPLE 2
Type I and Type II Errors
1. A Type I error is:
A. hiring or retaining a manager that subsequently underperforms 
expectations.
B. hiring or retaining a manager that subsequently outperforms, or per -
forms in line with, expectations.
C. not hiring or firing a manager who subsequently outperforms, or per -
forms in line with, expectations.
Solution
A is correct. The error consists of rejecting the null hypothesis (no skill) 
when it is correct.
2. A Type II error is:
A. hiring or retaining a manager that subsequently underperforms 
expectations.
B. hiring or retaining a manager that subsequently outperforms, or per -
forms in line with, expectations.
C. not hiring or firing a manager who subsequently outperforms, or per -
forms in line with, expectations.
Solution
C is correct. The error consists of not rejecting the null hypothesis (no skill) 
when it is incorrect.
3. The difference in expected cost between Type I and Type II errors is most 
likely :
A. higher the smaller the perceived difference between the distribution of 
skilled and unskilled managers.
B. lower the smaller the perceived difference between the distribution of 
skilled and unskilled managers.
C. zero.
Solution
B is correct. The less distinct the distribution of skilled managers from 
unskilled managers, the lower the opportunity cost of retaining and cost of 
hiring an unskilled manager. That is, the smaller the perceived difference 
between the distribution of skilled and unskilled managers, the lower the 
cost and incentive to fire a manager.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 88
QUANTITATIVE ELEMENTS OF MANAGER SEARCH 
AND SELECTION
describe uses of returns-based and holdings-based style analysis in 
investment manager selection
Performance appraisal captures most aspects of quantitative analysis, evaluating a 
manager’s strengths and weaknesses as measured by that manager’s ability to add 
value to a stated benchmark. Although the determination of whether the manager 
possesses skill is important, it is equally important to understand the manager’s risk 
profile. The manager has likely been selected to fill a particular role in the portfolio. As 
such, although it is important to select a skillful manager, the “best” manager may be 
one that delivers the desired exposures and is suitable for the investor’s assumptions, 
expectations, and biases.
Style Analysis
An important component of performance appraisal and manager selection is under -
standing the manager’s risk exposures relative to the benchmark and how they evolve 
over time. This understanding helps define the universe of potential managers and the 
monitoring of selected managers. The process is referred to as style analysis.
A manager’s self-reported risk exposures, such as portfolio concentration, industry 
exposure, capitalization exposure, and other quantitative measures, are the starting 
point in style analysis. They provide a means to classify managers by style for defin -
ing the selection process, a point of reference for evaluating the returns-based and 
holdings-based style analysis, and an interesting operational check on the manager.
The results of the returns-based style analysis (RBSA) and the holdings-based 
style analysis (HBSA) should be consistent with the manager’s philosophy and the 
investment process. If not, the process might not be repeatable or might be imple -
mented inconsistently. It is essential to look at all portfolio construction and risk 
management issues.
The results of the returns-based style analysis and the holdings-based style analysis 
should be tracked over time in order to ascertain if the risk trends or exposures are 
out of line with expectations or the manager’s stated style. Deviations may signal that 
issues, such as style drift, are developing.
Returns-based and holdings-based style analyses provide a means to determine the 
risks and sources of return for a particular strategy. To be useful, style analysis must be:
 ■Meaningful.  The risks reported must represent the important sources of 
performance return and risk.
 ■Accurate.  The reported values must reflect the manager’s actual risk 
exposures.
 ■Consistent.  The methodology must allow for comparison over time and 
across multiple managers.
 ■Timely.  The report must be available in a timely manner so that it is useful 
for making informed investment decisions.4
Quantitative Elements of Manager Search and Selection 89
Style analysis is most useful with strategies that hold publicly traded securities 
where pricing is frequent. It can be applied to other strategies (hedge funds and private 
equity, for example), but the insights drawn from a style analysis of such strategies are 
more likely to be used for designing additional lines of inquiry in the course of due 
diligence rather than for confirmation of the investment process.
Returns-based style analysis  (RBSA) is a top-down approach that involves esti -
mating a portfolio’s sensitivities to security market indexes representing a range of 
distinct factors. Although RBSA adds the additional analytical step of estimating the 
risk factors, as opposed to using a third-party or self-reported style categorization, the 
analysis is straightforward and typically does not require a large amount of additional, 
or difficult to acquire, data. RBSA should identify the important drivers of return 
and risk factors for the period analyzed and can be estimated even for complicated 
strategies. In addition, the process is comparable across managers and through time, 
and the use of returns data provides an objective style check that is not subject to 
window dressing. The analysis can be run immediately after the data are available, 
particularly in the case of publicly traded securities. As such, RBSA has many of the 
attributes of effective risk reporting.
The disadvantage is that RBSA is an imprecise tool. Although the additional compu -
tational effort required is not onerous, accuracy may be compromised, because RBSA 
effectively attributes performance to an unchanging average portfolio during the period. 
This attribution limits the ability to identify the impact of dynamic investment decisions 
and may distort the decomposition across sources of added value. Furthermore, the 
portfolio being analyzed might not reflect the current or future portfolio exposures. If 
the portfolio contains illiquid securities, stale prices may understate the risk exposure 
of the strategy. This is a particular problem for private equity (PE) and venture capital 
(VC) managers that hold illiquid or non-traded securities. VC and PE firms report 
performance based on the internal rate of return of cash distributions and appraisals 
of ongoing projects. As a result, reported performance can understate the volatility 
of return for shorter horizons or time periods with limited liquidity events. Longer 
periods generally provide more-accurate estimates of the manager’s underlying standard 
deviation of return. The timeliness of any analysis depends on the securities that take 
the longest to price, which can be challenging for illiquid or non-traded securities.
Holdings-based style analysis  (HBSA) is a bottom-up approach that estimates 
the risk exposures from the actual securities held in the portfolio at a point in time. 
This approach allows for estimation of current risk factors and offers several advan -
tages. Similar to RBSA, HBSA should identify all important drivers of return and risk 
factors; be comparable across managers and through time; provide an accurate view 
of the manager’s risk exposures, although potentially subject to window dressing; and 
be estimated immediately after the data become available.
Exhibit 3  presents a typical holdings-based style map. The manager being evalu -
ated, along with the other managers in the universe, is placed along the size ( y-axis) 
and style ( x-axis) dimensions. The portfolio holdings of the manager being evaluated 
exhibit a large-cap value bias in what is otherwise a rather diverse universe.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 90
Exhibit 3: Example of Holdings-Based Style Analysis
Giant
Large
Medium
Small
Micr o
Deep V alue Core Value Core Core Growth High Gr owth
Source : Morningstar Direct, The Mutual Fund Research Center.
As with RBSA, HBSA has some disadvantages. The computational effort increases 
with the complexity of the strategy and depends on the timing and degree of the 
transparency provided by the manager. This extra effort can be challenging for hedge 
fund, private equity, and venture capital managers that may be averse to or unable to 
provide position-level pricing. Even with mutual funds, the necessary transparency may 
come with a time lag. The usefulness of the analysis may be compromised because the 
portfolio reflects a snapshot in time and might not reflect the portfolio going forward, 
particularly for high-turnover strategies. Some factors may be difficult to estimate if 
the strategy is complex because HBSA requires an understanding of the underlying 
strategy. In general, HBSA is typically easier with equity strategies, particularly for 
ETFs because holdings are published daily. If the portfolio has illiquid securities, stale 
pricing may underestimate the risk exposure of the strategy. The report’s timeliness 
depends on the securities that take the longest to price, which can be challenging for 
illiquid or non-traded securities.
EXAMPLE 3
Style Analysis
1. Which of the following is an advantage of RBSA?
A. It is a more precise tool than HBSA.
B. It does not require potentially difficult to acquire data.
Capture Ratios and Drawdowns in Manager Evaluation 91
C. It is more accurate than HBSA when the portfolio contains illiquid 
securities.
Solution
B is correct. The data needed for RBSA are usually easier to obtain than the 
data required for HBSA. RBSA is not a precise tool, and it is not more accu -
rate than HBSA when the portfolio holds illiquid securities.
2. Which of the following is an advantage of HBSA?
A. It works well for high-turnover strategies.
B. It can identify important drivers of return and risk factors and is com -
parable across managers and through time.
C. It effectively attributes performance to a snapshot of the portfolio at a 
particular time and thus is not subject to window dressing.
Solution
B is correct. Although HBSA allows for estimation of current risk factors 
and is comparable across managers and through time, the necessary com -
putational effort increases with the strategy’s complexity and depends on 
the timing and degree of the transparency provided by the manager. Some 
factors may be difficult to estimate if the strategy is complex because this 
approach requires an understanding of the underlying strategy. In general, 
HBSA is typically easier for equity strategies. If the portfolio has illiquid 
securities, stale pricing may underestimate the risk exposure of the strategy. 
Window dressing and high turnover can compromise the results because 
the results are attributed to a snapshot of the portfolio.
CAPTURE RATIOS AND DRAWDOWNS IN MANAGER 
EVALUATION
describe uses of the upside capture ratio, downside capture ratio, 
maximum drawdown, drawdown duration, and up/down capture in 
evaluating managers
Because large losses require proportionally greater gains to reverse or offset, draw -
downs and capture ratios can be important factors in investment manager evaluation. 
A manager that experiences larger drawdowns may be less suitable for an investor 
closer to the end of their investment horizon. The capture ratio helps assess manager 
suitability relative to the investor’s IPS, especially in relation to the investor’s time 
horizon and risk tolerance.
Recall the following: (1) Upside capture (UC) measures capture when the bench -
mark return is positive. UC greater than 100% suggests out-performance relative to 
the benchmark. (2) Downside capture (DC) measures capture when the benchmark 
return is negative. DC less than 100% generally suggests out-performance relative to the 
benchmark. (3) The capture ratio  (CR)—upside capture divided by downside capture—
measures the asymmetry of return. (4) Drawdown  is the cumulative peak-to-trough 
loss during a particular continuous period and drawdown duration  is the total time 
from the start of the drawdown until the cumulative drawdown recovers to zero.5
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 92
Let’s illustrate the use of capture ratios in the analysis of manager returns. Consider 
the four stylized return profiles in Exhibit 4 .
Exhibit 4: Return Profile Summary
Profile Upside Capture Downside Capture Ratio
Long only 100% 100% 1.0
Positive asymmetry 75% 25% 3.0
Low beta 50% 50% 1.0
Negative asymmetry 25% 75% 0.3
Each strategy’s allocation to the S&P 500 Total Return (TR) Index and to 90-day T-bills 
(assuming monthly rebalancing to simplify the calculations) is based on the realized 
monthly return from January 2000 to December 2013. (This time period encompasses 
two significant drawdowns: the “tech bubble burst” of the early 2000s and the extreme 
drawdown of the Global Financial Crisis in 2008–2009.)
 ■The long-only profile is 100% allocated to the S&P 500 throughout the 
period.
 ■The low-beta profile is allocated 50% to the S&P 500 throughout the period.
 ■The positive asymmetry profile is allocated 75% to the S&P 500 for months 
when the S&P 500 return is positive and 25% when the S&P 500 return is 
negative.
 ■The negative asymmetry profile is allocated 25% to the S&P 500 for months 
when the S&P 500 return is positive and 75% when the S&P 500 return is 
negative.
The remainder for all profiles is allocated to 90-day T-bills. Exhibit 5  shows each 
profile’s cumulative monthly return for the period.
Capture Ratios and Drawdowns in Manager Evaluation 93
Exhibit 5: Each Profile’s Cumulative Monthly Return, January 2000–
December 2013
0
Positive Asymmetry Negative Asymmetry
Low Beta (50%) Long OnlyCumulative Return (%)
250
200
150
100
50
–50
–100
00 03 01 02 04 05 06 08 09 11 12 13 07 10
Exhibit 6  provides summary statistics for each profile based on monthly returns from 
January 2000 to December 2013. Although the long-only profile outperformed the 
low-beta profile over the full period, this outperformance resulted from the strong 
up market of 2013—the long-only profile lagged the low-beta profile for most of the 
period. The low beta profile achieved higher risk-adjusted returns and only half the 
volatility for the full period. The low-beta profile declined only 18.8% from January 
2000 to September 2002, compared with the long-only decline of 42.5%. As a result, 
the low-beta profile had higher cumulative performance from January 2000 to October 
2007 despite markedly lagging the long-only profile (56.0% to 108.4%) from October 
2002 to October 2007.
Although a low-beta approach may sacrifice performance, it shows that limiting 
drawdowns can result in better absolute and risk-adjusted returns in certain markets.
Not surprisingly, positive asymmetry results in better performance relative to long 
only, low beta, and negative asymmetry. Although the positive asymmetry profile lags 
in up markets, this lag is more than offset by the lower participation in down markets. 
Not surprisingly, the negative asymmetry profile lags.
Exhibit 6: Summary Statistics for Each Profile, January 2000–December 
2013
Strategy Long Only Low BetaPositive 
AsymmetryNegative 
Asymmetry
Cumulative return 64.0% 54.2% 228.1% −24.4%
Annualized return 3.60% 3.14% 8.86% −1.98%
Annualized standard 
deviation15.64% 7.79% 9.61% 10.01%
Sharpe ratio 0.10 0.14 0.71 −0.40
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 94
Strategy Long Only Low BetaPositive 
AsymmetryNegative 
Asymmetry
Beta 1.00 0.50 0.61 0.64
Drawdown (maximum) −50.9% −28.3% −26.9% −48.9%
We’ve shown that positive asymmetry is a desirable trait. When evaluating a manager 
that exhibits positive asymmetry in its returns, we need to understand whether the 
strategy is inherently convex or whether the profile is a result of manager skill. For 
example, a hedging strategy implemented by rolling forward out-of-the-money put 
options will typically return many small losses because more options expire worthless 
than are compensated for by the occasional large gain during a large market downturn. 
A manager employing this strategy will likely exhibit consistent positive asymmetry 
in his returns, but the positive asymmetry is likely due to the nature of the strategy 
rather than investment skill.
Let’s consider now the use of drawdowns in the analysis of manager returns. 
Drawdowns are stress tests of the investment process and can expose potentially 
flawed or inconsistently implemented investment processes, inadequate risk controls, 
or operational issues. Did the manager implement the stated investment process 
consistently? If yes, what lessons were learned and how might the investment process 
have been adapted as a result? If the drawdown resulted from a deviation from the 
stated investment process, why? During a large or long drawdown, a manager could 
start to worry more about business risk than investment risk and act in their own best 
interest rather than that of their investors. How a manager responds to a large draw -
down as it occurs (and what lessons are learned) provides evidence of the robustness 
and repeatability of the investment, portfolio construction, and risk management 
processes, as well as insight into the people implementing the processes.
EVENTS OF AUGUST 2007
Starting on 7 August 2007, many quantitative equity long–short strategies 
began to experience large drawdowns. Many managers had never experienced 
such losses or market conditions and started to sell positions as stop-loss and 
risk management policies were triggered ( Khandani and Lo 2011 ). This activ -
ity added to additional selling pressure, and the S&P 500 declined 13.4% by 8 
August. Those managers that sold ended up locking in large losses because the 
underperforming stocks and market subsequently recovered, with the S&P 500 
down only 5.7% for the month. In many cases, those funds that sold experienced 
redemptions or ended up closing.
As August 2007 demonstrated, distinguishing prudent risk management from a 
misalignment of interests is not always straightforward. Should a manager continue 
to actively trade a portfolio if the market environment no longer reflects their invest -
ment philosophy? In addition, traders will claim that it is better to cut losses because 
losses can signal that something has changed or that the timing of the trade is not 
right. Conversely, selling into a down market raises the risk of crystallizing losses 
and missing any subsequent reversal. The decision maker must assess whether the 
manager’s behavior was a disciplined application of the investment process, reflected a 
misalignment of interests, or simply resulted from panic or overreaction by the manager.
One aspect of suitability for the IPS is the investment horizon and its relationship 
to risk capacity. An investor closer to retirement, with less time to recover from losses, 
places more emphasis on absolute measures of risk. If there has been no change to 
investment policy and no change in the view that the manager remains suitable, the 
temptation to exit should be resisted to avoid exiting at an inauspicious time. Investors 
The Manager’s Investment Philosophy 95
with shorter horizons, with lower risk capacity, or those prone to overreacting to 
losses may be better served by allocating to managers with shallower and shorter 
expected drawdowns.
THE CONCEPT OF ACTIVE SHARE
Active share  measures the difference in portfolio holdings relative to the bench -
mark. A manager that precisely replicates the benchmark will have an active 
share of zero; a manager with no holdings in common with the benchmark will 
have an active share of one.
Given a strategy with N securities ( i = 1, 2, . . . , N), active share is calculated as
  Active Share  =   1 _ 2    ∑ i=1  N    |   Strategy Weight   i   −  Benchmark Weight   i    |  
Typically, managers are somewhere along the spectrum. The categorization of 
active share and tracking risk in Exhibit 7  has been suggested for active man -
agers. It is clear that full replication will appear as a closet indexer. A manager 
that uses sampling techniques to build the portfolio may, however, appear as a 
diversified stock picker depending on the universe under consideration and the 
dispersion of active share of the constituents. Tracking risk will be low, but active 
share might not be because only a subset of constituents is held. One reason is 
that high and low are relative to the universe being examined and the category 
definitions used. As such, it is important to examine risk factors and portfolio 
construction techniques of both active and passive managers.
 
Exhibit 7: Active Share vs. Tracking Risk
 
 
Active Share
Low High
Tracking riskHigh Sector rotation Concentrated stock pickers
Low Closet indexer Diversified stock pickers
 
THE MANAGER’S INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY
evaluate a manager’s investment philosophy and investment 
decision-making process
discuss how behavioral factors affect investment team decision 
making, and recommend techniques for mitigating their effects
The goal of manager due diligence is to weigh the potential risks that may arise from 
entering into an investment management relationship and entrusting assets to a firm. 
Although it is impossible to eliminate all potential risks, the allocator must assess 
how the firm will manage the broad range of risks it is likely to face in the future. 
This lesson outlines the general aspects of manager due diligence and the particular 
questions the investor needs to answer.6
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 96
Investment due diligence examines and evaluates the qualitative considerations 
that illustrate that the manager’s investment process is repeatable and consistently 
implemented. The objective is to understand whether the investment philosophy, 
process, people, and portfolio construction satisfy the assumption that past perfor -
mance provides some guidance for expected future performance. In other words, are 
the conclusions drawn from performance measurement, attribution, and appraisal 
reliable selection criteria? In addition, it is important to remember that investment 
managers are businesses. Regardless of the strength of the investment process or 
historical performance, investment management firms must be operated as successful 
businesses to ensure sustainability. Operational due diligence examines and evaluates 
the firm’s policies and procedures, to identify potential risks that might not be captured 
in historical performance and to assess the firm’s sustainability.
Investment Philosophy
The investment philosophy is the foundation of the investment process. Every invest -
ment strategy is based on a set of assumptions about the factors that drive performance 
and the manager’s beliefs about their ability to successfully exploit these sources of 
return. The investment manager should have a clear and concise investment philosophy.
First, every manager makes assumptions about market efficiency, including the 
degree and the time frame. Index-based strategies assume markets are sufficiently 
efficient and that active management cannot add value after transaction costs and fees. 
As a result, these strategies seek to capture return through exposure to systematic risk 
premiums , such as equity risk, duration risk, or credit risk. These strategies can also 
look to capture alternative risk premiums such as liquidity risk, natural disaster risk 
(through, for example, catastrophe bonds and quota shares), volatility risk, or some 
combination of these premiums (e.g., distressed strategies seek to capture credit and 
liquidity risk premiums).
In contrast, active strategies assume markets are sufficiently inefficient that security 
mispricings can be identified and exploited. These opportunities typically arise when 
market behavior deviates from the manager’s fundamental assumptions. Generally 
speaking, inefficiencies can be categorized as behavioral or structural.
 ■Behavioral inefficiencies  are perceived mispricings created by the actions 
of other market participants, usually associated with biases, such as trend 
following or loss aversion. These inefficiencies are temporary, lasting long 
enough for the manager to identify and exploit them before the market price 
and perceived intrinsic value converge.
 ■Structural inefficiencies  are perceived mispricings created by external 
or internal rules and regulations. These inefficiencies can be long lived 
and assume a continuation of the rules and regulations rather than a 
convergence.
Active strategies also typically make assumptions about the dynamics and struc -
tures of the market, such as the following: The correlation structure of the market is 
sufficiently stable over the investment horizon to make diversification useful for risk 
management; prices eventually converge to intrinsic value, which can be estimated 
by using a discounted cash flow model; or market prices are driven by predictable 
macroeconomic trends.
The Manager’s Investment Philosophy 97
It is important to evaluate these assumptions and the role they play in the invest -
ment process to understand how the strategy will behave through time and across 
market environments.
 ■Can the manager clearly and consistently articulate their investment phi -
losophy? It is hard to have confidence in the repeatability and efficacy of 
an investment process if the manager, and investment personnel, cannot 
explain the assumptions that underpin the process. This clarity also provides 
a consistency check that the investment process and personnel are appropri -
ate for the stated philosophy.
 ■Are the assumptions credible and consistent? That is, does the decision 
maker agree with the assumptions underlying the strategy, and are these 
assumptions consistent with the investment process? A decision maker who 
believes a market is efficient would likely not find the assumptions of an 
active manager in that market credible. In the decision maker’s judgment, 
the assumptions must support a repeatable and robust investment process.
 ■How has the philosophy developed over time? Ideally, the philosophy is 
unchanged through time, suggesting a repeatable process. If philosophy has 
evolved, it is preferred that changes are judged to be reasonable responses 
to changing market conditions rather than a series of ad hoc reactions to 
performance or investor flows. Such changes suggest a lack of repeatability 
and robustness.
 ■Are the return sources linked to credible and consistent inefficiencies? The 
decision maker must judge whether the investment philosophy is based 
on an inefficiency that is based on an informational advantage, or behav -
ioral and structural inefficiencies that suggest the investment process is 
repeatable.
If the source of return is linked to a credible inefficiency, there is the additional 
issue of capacity. Capacity has several related aspects, such as the level of assets 
the strategy or opportunity can absorb without a dilution of returns, the number of 
opportunities or securities available, and the ability to transact in a timely manner at 
or near the market price—that is, liquidity. Overall, capacity is the level, repeatability, 
and sustainability of returns that the inefficiency is expected to support in the future.
 ■Does the inefficiency provide a sufficient frequency of opportunity and 
level of return to cover transaction costs and fees? If so, does this require 
leverage?
 ■Does the inefficiency provide a repeatable source of return? That is, can the 
opportunity be captured by a repeatable process, or is each opportunity 
unique, requiring a different process of skill set to exploit?
 ■Is the inefficiency sustainable? That is, at what asset level would the realized 
return from the inefficiency be unacceptably low? Sustainability will be a 
function of the market’s depth and liquidity, as well as how much capital 
is allocated, either by the manager or competitors, to the inefficiency. All 
else equal, the more well-known an inefficiency, the more likely it is to be 
arbitraged away.
UNCOMMON WAYS OF PASSING THE INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY TEST
1. Managers that measure the success of the steps of the process and not 
just the ultimate outcome.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 98
For example, consider a bond manager that makes the claim that his 
or her credit research not only predicts upgrades and downgrades, 
but makes those predictions before the expectation of a rating change 
is reflected in the market price. This manager tracks every predic -
tion to see if the market consensus (as reflected by price) and rating 
agencies come around to his or her view. Benefits of such an approach 
include (1) the manager knows their views only have value if they are 
not only correct but different than consensus, and (2) they track how 
prices eventually come to reflect, or not reflect, their views. Similarly, 
managers that evaluate their own performance with strategy bench -
marks designed to replicate their selection universe demonstrate they 
understand the importance of attempting to differentiate alpha from 
noise (see Kuenzi 2003 ).
2. Managers that recognize that every strategy they come up with is 
potentially subject to being arbitraged away.
For example, consider a quantitative equity manager that that plays 
many themes at once. Each theme is viewed as having a finite life, 
and the performance of each theme is isolated and monitored so as to 
observe the decay in the value of the theme. The manager considers 
his or her competitive advantage to be in the identification of new 
themes, and in the technology for measuring the contribution of each 
theme to performance. A similar idea is presented in the adaptive 
market hypothesis of Lo (2004) , where the market is always tending 
toward efficiency, but the types of trades needed to move it towards 
efficiency rotate and evolve over time.
3. Managers that claim they exploit inefficiencies, and identify the spe -
cific inefficiency they are exploiting with every position they take.
Most managers that say they exploit inefficiencies use this claim as a 
broad justification for their investment process, but are unable to iden -
tify the specific inefficiency they are exploiting in any given decision 
they make. Those that routinely specify how their information or point 
of view differs from that reflected in price are much more credible.
4. Managers that know their companies so well that they are quicker to 
interpret change, even though they have no explicit alpha thesis.
There is always an exception to the rule. Sometimes a manager is sim -
ply talented and cannot articulate an alpha thesis.
Despite examples such as these, it remains frustratingly difficult to distinguish 
between true alpha-generators and alpha-pretenders. Investors should insist 
that alpha-generators explain their source of advantage.
This excerpt is from John R. Minahan, CFA, “The Role of Investment Philosophy 
in Evaluating Investment Managers: A Consultant’s Perspective on Distinguishing 
Alpha from Noise, ” Journal of Investing 15 (May 2006): 6–11. Copyright © 2006 by 
Institutional Investor Journals. Reprinted with permission.
The Manager’s Investment Philosophy 99
EXAMPLE 4
Investment Philosophy
1. Which of the following is not an important consideration when evaluating a 
manager’s investment philosophy?
A. What are the compensation arrangements of key employees?
B. Are the investment philosophy assumptions credible and consistent?
C. Can the manager clearly and consistently articulate their investment 
philosophy?
Solution
A is correct. Employee compensation is a legal and compliance issue consid -
ered as part of operational due diligence.
2. Generally speaking, inefficiencies can be most usefully  categorized as:
A. large and small.
B. internal and external.
C. structural and behavioral.
Solution
C is correct. Behavioral inefficiencies are created by the actions of other 
participants in the market. These inefficiencies are temporary, lasting long 
enough for the manager to identify and exploit them before the market price 
and perceived intrinsic value converge. Structural inefficiencies are created 
by external or internal rules and regulations. These inefficiencies can be long 
lived and assume a continuation of the rules and regulations rather than a 
convergence.
3. Which of the following is not an important consideration when evaluating 
the capacity of an inefficiency?
A. Does the strategy rely on unique information?
B. Does the inefficiency provide a repeatable source of return?
C. Does the inefficiency provide a sufficient frequency of opportunity and 
level of return to cover transaction costs and fees?
Solution
A is correct. The uniqueness of information used by the manager is a con -
sideration when evaluating the assumptions of the investment process.
Investment Personnel
An investment process can only be as good as the people who create and implement 
it, and even the best process can be compromised by poor execution by the people 
involved. This view is not a question of liking the manager or team but of trusting 
that they possess the expertise and experience to effectively implement the strategy.
 ■Does the investment team have sufficient expertise and experience to 
effectively execute the investment process? The need for expertise is self-ev -
ident. The greater the experience, particularly managing the current strategy 
across market environments, the greater the confidence in the manager’s 
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 100
ability to effectively execute the investment process. As noted with draw -
downs, it is especially instructive to see how the manager responded to 
stressed markets and poor performance.
 ■Does the investment team have sufficient depth to effectively execute the 
investment process? A strategy that focuses on a small universe of publicly 
traded stocks might not require a large investment team. A global macro or 
multi-strategy fund, which holds positions across numerous global markets, 
likely requires a large team with expertise and experience supporting the 
manager.
 ■What is the level of key person risk ? A strategy that is overly dependent on 
the judgment or particular skills of an individual or small team of people 
faces key person risk, an overreliance on an individual or individuals whose 
departure would negatively affect the strategy’s performance.
 ■What kinds of agreements (e.g., non-compete) and incentives (ownership, 
bonus, pay) exist to retain and attract key employees to join and stay at the 
firm?
 ■What has been the turnover of firm personnel? High personnel turnover 
risks the loss of institutional knowledge and experience within the team.
Behavioral Biases among Investment Teams
Investment decisions are often made by teams rather than individuals. In 2021, 
team-managed mutual funds accounted for 64% of all US active mutual funds 
(Karagiannidis and Booth 2022 ). The primary motivation for team management is 
the idea that “two heads are better than one. ” More formally, the application to a task 
of a number of individuals, each with different skills and experiences, can provide 
for more effective decision making. A secondary motivation for team investment 
management is to mitigate key person risk.
While teams can mitigate some individual behavioral biases, such as overconfi -
dence in forecasting, teams also introduce new biases or exacerbate others. Indeed, 
research on the performance of team-managed versus individual-managed mutual 
funds is mixed. Several studies have found that team-managed funds underperform 
individual-managed funds ( Chen, Harrison, Ming, and Kubik 2004 ; Baer, Kempf, and 
Ruenzi 2005 ; Bär, Ciccotello, and Ruenzi 2010 ; Goldman, Sun, and Zhou 2016 ). Several 
other studies have found the opposite ( Patel and Sarkissian 2017 ; Karagiannidis 2010 ). 
And some studies have found there is no difference in performance between the two 
(Bliss, Potter, and Schwarz 2008 ; Wang 2016 ; Sargis and Chang 2017 ). The mixed 
performance record suggests that there is nothing magical about a team, so managers 
should focus on creating an effective structure and culture.
Three common behavioral biases that can adversely affect investment teams’ per -
formance are groupthink, authority bias, and aversion to complexity.
Groupthink  occurs when a team minimizes conflict and dissent in reaching and 
maintaining a consensus. The pursuit of harmony overrides individual expression and 
may even encourage individuals to withhold information and their perspectives from 
the team. Common symptoms of groupthink are closed-mindedness and confirmation 
bias, where fresh sources of information, different interpretations, and dissent are 
ignored or minimized. A portfolio management team may become convinced that a 
recession is imminent based on an inverted yield curve and falling commodity prices 
and thus seek to position the portfolio defensively by decreasing exposure to cyclicals. 
While this may ultimately be the right decision, the team must remain open to the 
possibility that it isn’t. For example, other leading economic indicators may suggest a 
different conclusion, and it may behoove the team to speak with an analyst who has 
The Manager’s Investment Philosophy 101
made a different call. The team should also investigate its own historical track record 
of recession calls, as well as the reliability of calls made based on an inverted yield 
curve and falling commodity prices.
Authority bias  involves groups deferring to a group member that is a subject 
matter expert or in a position of authority (e.g., the senior-most group member). For 
example, a research analyst may recommend a semiconductor equipment stock to a 
team of three portfolio managers. One of the portfolio managers is a former technology 
research analyst and votes to not buy the stock. The other two members vote the same 
way, deferring to the subject matter expertise of the other manager. While this may 
be the right call, it undermines the reason for a team in the first place: a synthesis of 
diverse perspectives and skills.
Aversion to complexity  is a well-known phenomenon of groups in many profes -
sional contexts, in which disproportionate attention is given to trivial issues at the 
expense of important but harder-to-grasp or contested topics. This phenomenon is also 
known as Parkinson’s law of triviality or, colloquially, “bike-shedding, ” named after C. 
Northcote Parkinson’s 1957 memorable story of a hypothetical committee organized 
to approve plans for a nuclear power plant that spent more time discussing the design 
of a bicycle storage shed outside the plant than the design of the nuclear reactor.
Aversion to complexity can surface in numerous ways. For example, a portfolio 
management team may spend far more time scrutinizing a position in a consumer 
staples company that they have personal experience with but comparatively little 
time on a position in a semiconductor or biotechnology company, even if the latter 
position is larger in the portfolio.
Investment team meetings can also be sidetracked by immaterial business issues 
that are best left to other venues or personnel. A survey of more than 120 investment 
committees asked committee members to rank their tasks from most to least important 
and then asked the members to keep track of how they actually allocated their time. 
The survey revealed that the committees spent a great deal of time on issues they rated 
as unimportant, at the expense of important and more difficult issues, such as asset 
allocation, capital market expectations, and manager selection ( Payne and Wood 2002 ).
Similar to how investment due diligence should inquire about a manager’s per -
sonnel, it can also be useful to inquire about whether the manager has built team 
structures and processes to mitigate behavioral biases. Such an inquiry may include 
the following:
 ■How large is the investment decision-making team? Research suggests that 
a team size between three and five is optimal, with larger teams introducing 
too many coordination issues ( Patel and Sarkissian 2017 ) and increasing the 
odds of groupthink.
 ■How are decisions made? While it may be awkward, using a secret ballot 
may be preferable to open deliberation because it reduces groupthink and 
authority bias.
 ■How are meetings conducted? What makes it on the agenda? To avoid 
complexity aversion, as well as availability bias, meeting agendas should 
be agreed on in advance, with the most important topics covered first and 
allotted the longest time for discussion.
 ■Is the investment team diverse? Research suggests that team diversity—in 
terms of social and cognitive categories—can reduce groupthink and errors 
(analogous to how combinations of uncorrelated assets reduce portfolio 
volatility) and that members of diverse teams may devote more effort to 
tasks because they are less concerned with socially “fitting in” and conflict 
avoidance, which is common in homogeneous groups. For these reasons and 
others, CFA Institute has long advocated for diversity, equity, and inclusion 
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 102
(DEI) in the investment industry. For more information on DEI and the 
CFA Institute DEI Code, visit https://  rpc .cfainstitute  .org/  en/ codes  -and  
-standards/  diversity  -equity  -inclusion  -codes .
THE MANAGER’S INVESTMENT DECISION-MAKING 
PROCESS
evaluate a manager’s investment philosophy and investment 
decision-making process
The investment decision-making process has four elements: signal creation, signal 
capture, portfolio construction, and portfolio monitoring.
Signal Creation (Idea Generation)
An investment signal is a data point or fact that can be observed early enough to 
implement as an investment position. The basic question is, how are investment 
ideas generated? The efficient market hypothesis posits that the key to exploiting 
inefficiencies is to have information that is all of the following:
 ■Unique.  Does the strategy rely on unique information? If so, how is this 
information collected, and how is the manager able to retain an informa -
tional edge, particularly in a regulatory environment that seeks to reduce 
informational asymmetries?
 ■Timely.  Does the strategy possess an information timing advantage? If so, 
how is this information collected, and how is the manager able to retain a 
timing edge, particularly in a regulatory environment that seeks to reduce 
informational asymmetries?
 ■Interpreted differently.  Interpretation is typically how managers seek to 
differentiate themselves. Does the manager possess a unique way of inter -
preting information? Or does the manager claim their strategy possesses 
a “secret sauce” component or that its team is simply smarter than other 
managers?
Signal Capture (Idea Implementation)
The second step is signal capture, translating the generated investment idea into an 
investment position.
 ■What is the process for translating investment ideas into investment 
positions?
 ■Is this process repeatable and consistent with the strategy assumptions?
 ■What is the process, and who is ultimately responsible for approving an 
investment position?7
The Manager’s Investment Decision-Making Process 103
Portfolio Construction
The third element is portfolio construction; how investment positions are implemented 
within the portfolio. This element begins to capture the manager’s risk management 
methodology. Good investment ideas need to be implemented properly to exploit 
opportunities and capture desired risk premiums. It is also important that portfolio 
construction is consistent with the investment philosophy and process as well as the 
expertise of the investment personnel.
 ■How are portfolio allocations set and adjusted? The allocation process 
should be consistent with investment philosophy and process. For exam -
ple, if the portfolio is actively managed, its turnover should agree with the 
frequency of signals, the payoff horizon of the signals, and the securities’ 
liquidity. The allocation process should be well defined and consistently 
applied, supporting the repeatability of the investment process. For example, 
are allocations made quantitatively or qualitatively?
 ■Do portfolio allocations incorporate the manager’s conviction (besides just 
the securities’ risks and correlations with other securities in the portfolio)?
 ■How have the portfolio characteristics changed with asset growth? Has the 
number and/or characteristics of the positions held changed to accommo -
date a larger amount of AUM?
 ■Does the portfolio use stop-losses to manage risk? If so, are they hard 
(positions are automatically sold when the loss threshold is reached) or 
soft (positions are evaluated when the loss threshold is reached)? Although 
stop-losses represent a clear risk management approach, the goal of protect -
ing against large losses must be balanced with the risk of closing positions 
too frequently.
 ■What types of securities are used? Does the manager use derivatives to 
express investment ideas? What experience does the manager have invest -
ing in these securities? The manager should be sufficiently well-versed and 
experienced with the securities used to understand how they will behave in 
different market environments.
 ■How are hedges implemented? What security types are used? How are 
hedge ratios set? Consider a manager that focuses on stock selection to 
generate alpha and hedges to reduce or remove market risk. The hedges 
must be sized correctly, or they can be ineffective (underhedged) or they can 
overwhelm stock selection (overhedged), with performance driven more by 
beta than by alpha.
 ■How are long and short ideas expressed? A manager might target a certain 
long/short exposure that may or may not vary according to market condi -
tions. If long and short positions are fully offset, with the idea of minimizing 
market risk but capturing alpha, the positions must be well matched and 
sized correctly. A manager can implement this by taking positions that are 
local-currency neutral (i.e., dollar neutral) and have an equal value of secu -
rities on both sides. However, to fully minimize any remaining market risk, 
the manager should also aim to be beta neutral so that aggregate long and 
short exposures net to zero.
Alternatively, a manager can pursue a pairs strategy to construct long and short 
exposures. Pairs trading is a relative value strategy where a manager selects two or more 
securities with similar characteristics that are correlated and whose price relationship 
is out of historical trading range. The manager generally establishes a short position in 
the overvalued securities and an equal-sized long position in the undervalued secu -
rities based on a view that their price relationship will converge to historical norms.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 104
An important risk is liquidity. Strategies that are not intending to capture a liquidity 
risk premium must be aware of portfolio liquidity in terms of adapting to changing 
information, changing market conditions, and changing investor liquidity demands. 
An existing portfolio consisting of illiquid securities will be more costly to change, 
not only to take advantage of new opportunities but also to trade because of higher 
transaction costs. There is the additional cost of having to sell positions at inoppor -
tune times as a result of market events or investor liquidity demands. When assessing 
security liquidity, it is important to consider all of the assets under management for 
that particular manager and investment process.
 ■What percentage of the portfolio can be liquidated in five business days or 
less? What percentage requires more than 10 business days to liquidate? The 
less liquid the portfolio, the higher the transaction costs if the manager is 
forced to sell one or more positions. A more liquid portfolio offers flexibil -
ity if the manager faces unexpected investor liquidity demands or rapidly 
changing market conditions.
 ■What is the average daily volume weighted by portfolio position size?
 ■Have any of the portfolio holdings been suspended from trading? If so, what 
is the name of the company, and what are the circumstances pertaining to 
the suspension?
 ■Are there any holdings in which ownership by the firm across all portfolios 
collectively accounts for more than 5% of the market capitalization or float 
of the security?
 ■What is the firm’s trading strategy? Does the investment manager tend to 
provide liquidity or demand it? Has the trading strategy changed in response 
to asset growth?
Monitoring the Portfolio
The investment decision-making process is a feedback loop that consists of ongoing 
monitoring of the portfolio in light of new information and analysis. This monitoring 
includes an assessment of both external and internal considerations. External con -
siderations include the economic and financial market environments. Has anything 
meaningful occurred that might affect the manager’s ability to exploit the market 
inefficiency that is the strategy’s focus? Internal considerations include the portfo -
lio’s performance, risk profile, and construction. Has anything changed that might 
signal potential style drift or other deviations from the investment process? Ongoing 
monitoring and performance attribution help to ensure that the manager remains 
appropriate for the clients’ mandates.
OPERATIONAL DUE DILIGENCE
evaluate the costs and benefits of pooled investment vehicles and 
separate accounts
compare types of investment manager contracts, including their 
major provisions and advantages and disadvantages8
Operational Due Diligence 105
Performance appraisal assumes that reported returns are accurate and fully reflect the 
manager’s risk profile. Unfortunately, as we have seen, this assumption is not always 
true. Although investment due diligence is one step toward understanding these risks, 
one must remember that investment management firms are businesses , and in many 
cases, they are small businesses with a high degree of business risk. Regardless of the 
strength of the investment process or the historical investment results, investment 
management firms must be operated as a successful business in order to ensure their 
sustainability. This requirement creates the potential for a misalignment of interests 
between the manager and the investor. Operational due diligence analyzes the integrity 
of the business and seeks to understand and evaluate these risks by examining and 
evaluating the firm’s policies and procedures.
Weaknesses in the firm’s infrastructure represent latent risks to the investor. A 
strong back office (support staff) is critical for safeguarding assets and ensuring that 
accurate reports are issued in a timely manner. The manager should have a robust 
trading process that seeks to avoid human error. A repeatable process requires con -
sistent implementation. The allocator needs to understand the following:
 ■What is the firm’s trading policy?
 ■Does the firm use soft dollar commissions? If so, is there a rigorous process 
for ensuring compliance?
 ■What is the process for protecting against unauthorized trading?
 ■How are fees calculated and collected?
 ■How are securities allocated across investor accounts, including both pooled 
and separately managed accounts? The allocation method should be objec -
tive (e.g., based on invested capital) to avoid the potential to benefit some 
investors at the expense of others.
 ■How many different strategies does the firm manage, and are any new strat -
egies being contemplated? Is the firm’s infrastructure capable of efficiently 
and accurately implementing the different strategies?
 ■What information technology offsite backup facilities are in place?
 ■Does the firm have processes, software, and hardware in place to handle 
cybersecurity issues?
An important constituent of the infrastructure is third-party service providers, 
including the firm’s prime broker, administrator, auditor, and legal counsel. They pro -
vide an important independent verification of the firm’s performance and reporting.
 ■Are the firm’s third-party service providers known and respected?
 ■Has there been any change in third-party providers? If so, when and why? 
This information is particularly important with regard to the firm’s auditor. 
Frequent changes of the auditor are a red flag and may mean the manager is 
trying to hide something.
The risk management function should be viewed as an integral part of the invest -
ment firm and not considered a peripheral function. The extent to which integration 
exists provides insight into the firm’s culture and the alignment of interests between 
the manager and the investor. The manager should have a risk manual that is readily 
available for review:
 ■Does the portfolio have any hard/soft investment guidelines?
 ■How are these guidelines monitored?
 ■What is the procedure for curing breaches?
 ■Who is responsible for risk management?
 ■Is there an independent risk officer?
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 106
Firm
An investment management firm must operate as a successful business to ensure sus -
tainability. A manager that goes out of business does not have a repeatable investment 
process. An important aspect of manager selection is assessing the level of business risk.
 ■What is the ownership structure of the firm?
 ■What are the total firm AUM and AUM by investment strategy?
 ■What is the firm’s breakeven AUM (the asset base needed to generate 
enough fee revenue to cover total firm expenses)?
 ■Are any of the firm’s strategies closed to new capital?
 ■How much capital would the firm like to raise?
A firm that is independently owned may have greater autonomy and flexibility than 
a firm owned by a larger organization, but it may have a higher cost structure and 
lack financial support during market events, raising potential business risks. Outside 
ownership could create a situation in which the outside owner has objectives that 
conflict with the investment strategy. For instance, the outside owner might want to 
increase the asset base to generate higher fee revenue, but this action could prevent 
the portfolio from holding lower-capitalization stocks. Ideally, ownership should be 
spread across as many employees as is feasible and practical. A firm managing a smaller 
asset base may be more nimble and less prone to dilution of returns but will likely have 
lower revenues to support infrastructure and compensate employees. At a minimum, 
the asset base needs to be sufficient to support the firm’s current expenditures.
Last, and by no means least important, are legal and compliance issues. It is critical 
that the firm’s interests are aligned with those of the investor.
 ■What are the compensation arrangements for key employees? For example, 
are any people compensated with stock in the firm, and if so, what happens 
to this stock when they leave the firm?
 ■Do employees invest personal assets in the firm’s strategies? Investing their 
own money in the same products in which the firm’s clients invest creates 
an alignment of interests, but too large a proportion of their own assets 
invested in this one product may create personal/business risk for the man -
ager that overrides the alignment of interests.
 ■Does the firm foster a culture of compliance?
 ■What is covered in the compliance manual?
 ■Has the firm or any of its employees been involved with an investigation by 
any financial market regulator or self-regulatory organization?
 ■Has the firm been involved in any lawsuits?
 ■Are any of the firm’s employees involved in legal actions or personal lit -
igation that might affect their ability to continue to fulfill their fiduciary 
responsibilities?
Hiring a manager requires trust. A firm’s culture as expressed by its compliance 
policies and procedures should provide a level of confidence that the manager’s and 
investor’s interests are aligned.
THE INVESTMENT PROCESS
Bernard “Bernie” L. Madoff ran one of the biggest frauds in Wall Street history. 
One of the first indications that something was amiss at Bernard L. Madoff 
Investment Securities arose when Harry Markopolos was unable to reconcile 
the return track record with the investment process. In addition to observing the 
Operational Due Diligence 107
unrealistically consistent nature of the claimed returns, Markopolos concluded 
that there was no way to generate the returns using the claimed investment 
process. Further analysis convinced him that Madoff’s returns resulted not from 
front running—that is, taking positions to exploit knowledge of investor trade 
flows—but rather from fraud.
In hindsight, there were many red flags over the years that indicated there 
was something wrong with Madoff’s investment management process. The firm 
claimed to generate steady returns in every market environment. Mr. Madoff 
was known to dismiss questions about his strategy, arguing that his business 
was too complicated for outsiders to understand. He also operated as a broker/
dealer with an asset management division, profiting from trading commissions 
rather than the investment management fees that hedge funds charged. The 
structure seemed odd to other investment professionals, raising concerns about 
the firm’s legitimacy. Another red flag was raised when it became known that 
the firm used a small, unknown auditor with only three employees. If, as Mr. 
Madoff claimed, the strategy was so complex that no one could understand it, 
a small, three-person audit firm would be unlikely to be able to effectively audit 
the financial statements ( Zuckerman 2008 ).
SELF-REPORTED RISK FACTORS
Requesting and obtaining self-reported risk factors not only is important for 
understanding the manager’s investment process but also provides an interesting 
operational check. A manager should readily comply with all requests for risk 
reporting. If not, it suggests a lack of transparency that may become challenging 
for monitoring the manager and strategy in the future. Additionally, it might 
indicate an inability to generate essential reports, which raises questions about 
the firm’s policies and procedures.
All risk reporting should be meaningful, consistent, accurate, and timely. 
A lack of meaningful reporting indicates that the reports are not useful in 
monitoring the manager and that there is a lack of transparency. In the worst 
case, the manager does not understand the risk exposures or does not want to 
disclose them.
A lack of consistent reporting also reduces the usefulness of the reporting. 
Inconsistent reports preclude the ability to track levels and trends of important 
risk factors. The manager may be choosing to selectively report particular risks 
that they deem important or interesting. In the worst case, it may mean that 
the manager is selectively reporting in order to hide risks created by deviations 
from the stated investment process.
A lack of accuracy suggests that the manager cannot properly measure port -
folio risks or is intentionally misreporting results. A lack of timeliness reduces 
the reports’ usefulness and suggests either inefficient procedures or attempts to 
manipulate the flow of information. In all of these cases, poor risk reporting, at 
a minimum, suggests a reevaluation of the manager and, if issues are identified, 
potential termination.
Investment Vehicle
There are two broad options for implementing investment strategies: individual 
separate accounts and pooled (or commingled) vehicles. An additional operational 
consideration is the evaluation of the investment vehicle—its appropriateness to the 
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 108
investment strategy and its suitability for the investor. Separate accounts offer addi -
tional control, customization, tax efficiency, reporting, and transparency advantages, 
but these come at a higher cost.
In a pooled or commingled vehicle, the money from multiple investors is held 
as a single portfolio and managed without potential customization for any investor. 
Such vehicles include open-end funds, closed-end funds, exchange-traded funds, 
exchange-traded notes, and hedge funds.
Separately Managed Accounts
As the name implies, a separately managed account (SMA) vehicle holds assets in an 
investor’s name separate from other investors. The assets are managed to a particular 
mandate with the potential to customize the strategy for each investor. The advantages 
of SMA vehicles include the following:
 ■Ownership.  In an SMA, the investor owns the individual securities directly. 
This approach provides additional safety should a liquidity event occur. 
Although the manager continues to make investment decisions, these deci -
sions will not be influenced by the redemption or liquidity demand of other  
investors in the strategy. An SMA also provides clear legal ownership for the 
recovery of assets resulting from unforeseen events, such as bankruptcy or 
mismanagement.
 ■Customization.  SMAs allow the investor to potentially express individual 
constraints or preferences within the portfolio. SMAs can thus more closely 
address the investor’s particular investment objectives.
 ■Tax efficiency.  SMAs offer potentially improved tax efficiency—for example, 
in such jurisdictions as the United States, where investors pay taxes only on 
realized capital gains.
 ■Transparency.  SMAs offer real-time, position-level detail to the investor, 
providing complete transparency and accurate attribution to the investor. 
Even if a pooled vehicle provides position-level detail, such information will 
likely be presented with a delay.
If the SMA is customized, additional investment due diligence may be required 
to account for differences in security selection or portfolio construction. In addition, 
there are operational due diligence considerations.
 ■Cost.  Separate accounts represent an additional operational burden on the 
manager, which translates into potentially higher costs for the investor. 
SMAs do not scale as easily as pooled vehicles. Once a pooled investment is 
established and the fixed costs paid, the cost of each new investor is largely 
the incremental costs of custody, trading larger positions, and generating 
an additional report. With an SMA, a new account must be established for 
each investor. In addition, SMAs are likely to face higher transaction costs 
to the degree that trades cannot be aggregated to reduce trade volumes. 
These costs are a function of the extent to which the strategy is customized 
or traded differently to accommodate different investor needs.
 ■Tracking risk.  Customization of the strategy creates tracking risk relative to 
the benchmark, which can confuse attribution because performance will 
reflect investor constraints rather than manager decisions.
 ■Investor behavior.  Transparency, combined with control and customization, 
allows for potential micromanagement by the investor—that is, the inves -
tor attempting to manage the portfolio. Such an effort not only negates the 
benefit of hiring a manager but is particularly problematic if these changes 
Operational Due Diligence 109
decrease the portfolio’s value. Potential investor behaviors include perfor -
mance chasing, familiarity bias (being overly averse to unfamiliar holdings), 
and loss aversion (a tendency to disaggregate the portfolio and not appreci -
ate the value of hedging).
The allocator’s goal is to evaluate the costs and benefits of the vehicle used and 
judge its suitability for the IPS:
 ■Is the vehicle structure consistent with the investment process?
 ■Does the manager have the operational infrastructure necessary to manage 
the SMA?
 ■Is there a benefit to holding the securities in a separate account? If so, are 
these benefits sufficient to compensate for additional costs?
 ■Is tax efficiency an important objective of the IPS?
 ■Are there concerns that the available transparency and ability to customize 
will result in decisions by the investor that do not add value?
EXAMPLE 5
Pooled Investments and Separate Accounts
1. Which of the following are advantages of separately managed accounts com -
pared with pooled investments?
A. Typically lower cost
B. Potential management of the portfolio by the investor
C. Ability to take close account of individual client constraints or 
preferences
Solution
C is correct. With SMAs, the investor owns the individual securities directly 
and can potentially express individual constraints or preferences within the 
portfolio. In particular, SMAs offer potentially improved tax efficiency in 
some jurisdictions, such as the United States because the investor pays taxes 
only on the capital gains realized and allows the implementation of tax-effi -
cient investing and trading strategies.
Evaluation of the Investment’s Terms
An additional and important aspect of manager selection is understanding the terms 
of the investment as presented in the prospectus, private placement memorandum, 
and/or limited partnership agreement. These documents are, in essence, the contract 
between the investor and the manager, outlining each party’s rights and responsibilities. 
Although these documents cover numerous topics, this lesson focuses on liquidity 
and fees. The objective of the decision maker is to determine whether the liquidity 
and fee structure make the manager suitable for the investor’s needs and the “best” 
manager for expressing a particular portfolio need.
Liquidity
Different vehicles provide different degrees of liquidity. Liquidity is defined as the 
timeliness with which a security or asset can be sold at or near the current price. The 
same criteria can be applied to managers.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 110
The most liquid vehicles are closed-end funds and ETFs. As listed securities, they 
can be bought and sold intra-day, and the price received will depend on the trading 
volume and depth of the fund. The obvious advantage of these funds is ease of trad -
ing, although there can be some price uncertainty for less liquid funds, particularly 
when trying to buy or sell a large number of shares. Open-end funds are slightly less 
liquid, providing daily liquidity but also price certainty; shares are bought and sold 
at the end-of-day NAV.
Unlike open-end funds, ETFs, or closed-end funds, limited partnerships, such as 
hedge funds, venture capital funds, and private equity funds, typically require inves -
tors to invest their money for longer periods. Hedge fund liquidity has four basic 
features: redemption frequency, notification period, lockup, and gates. Redemption 
frequency indicates how often an investor can withdraw capital from the fund, and the 
notification period indicates how far in advance of the redemption investors must tell 
the fund of their intention to redeem. A lockup is the initial period, after making an 
investment, during which investors cannot redeem their holding. Lockups have two 
types: a hard lock, which allows for no redemptions, and a soft lock, which charges a 
fee, paid into the fund, for redemptions. A mutual fund redemption fee is equivalent 
to a hedge fund soft lock. Gates limit the amount of fund assets, or investor assets 
that can be redeemed at one redemption date.
Private equity and venture capital funds provide the least liquidity. Investors are 
contractually obligated to contribute specific amounts (capital calls) during the invest -
ment phase and then receive distributions and capital as investments are harvested 
during the remaining term of the fund. A typical investment phase is 5 years. The typical 
life of a fund is 10 years, with the option to extend the term for two 1-year periods.
The obvious disadvantage of partnership liquidity terms is the reduced flexibility 
to adjust portfolio allocations in light of changing market conditions or investor cir -
cumstances, as well as the reduced ability to meet unexpected liquidity needs. The 
advantage of such terms is that they do lock up capital for longer horizons, allowing 
funds to take long-term views and hold less liquid securities—such as start-up com -
panies, buyouts, turnarounds, real estate, or natural resources—with reduced risk 
of having to sell portfolio holdings at inopportune times in response to redemption 
requests. An additional advantage, which was apparent during the 2008 financial 
crisis, is that limited liquidity imposes this long horizon view on investors, reducing 
or removing their ability to overreact.
Because SMA assets are held in the investor’s name, the securities in the portfolio 
can be sold at any time. As a result, an SMA’s liquidity will depend on the liquidity 
of the securities held. An SMA holding listed large-cap stocks will likely be highly 
liquid, whereas an investor in an SMA that holds unlisted or illiquid securities will 
have to accept a discount when selling.
MANAGEMENT FEES
describe the three basic forms of performance-based fees
analyze and interpret a sample performance-based fee schedule
Investors seek strong performance net of fees. Managers charge fees to cover operating 
costs and earn a return on their capital—primarily human capital. A manager’s fixed 
costs are relatively small and primarily cover the costs of technology and the long-term 
lease of office space. Variable costs, which consist largely of payroll and marketing 9
Management Fees 111
costs, dominate the income statements of asset management companies. Because a 
considerable portion of employee compensation comes in the form of bonuses, senior 
management can reduce bonus payouts as fee revenue declines in order to smooth a 
company’s profitability.1
Investors are increasingly sensitive to management fees. Average asset-weighted 
expense ratios (management fees and fund expenses) incurred by mutual fund 
investors have fallen substantially. In 2000, equity mutual fund investors incurred 
expense ratios of 0.99%, on average, or 99 cents for every $100 invested. By 2021, that 
average had fallen to 0.47%, a decline of 53%. Hybrid and bond mutual fund expense 
ratios also have declined. The average hybrid mutual fund expense ratio fell from 
0.89% in 2000 to 0.57% in 2021, a reduction of 36%. The average bond mutual fund 
expense ratio fell from 0.76% in 2000 to 0.39% in 2021, a decline of 49%. The decline 
is a function of several factors: the allocation of the fixed portion of expenses over 
a larger asset base, increasing investor preference for no-load share classes, and the 
increasing allocations to lower-cost index funds. Aside from these structural factors 
lowering average expense ratios, there has been more generalized downward pressure 
on fees—the average expense ratio of actively managed equity mutual funds declined 
from 1.06% in 2000 to 0.68% in 2021. Likewise, the average expense ratio of actively 
managed bond mutual funds declined from 0.77% in 2000 to 0.46% in 2021. Average 
expense ratios for index-based equity and bond funds declined from 27 bps and 21 
bps in 2000, respectively, to 6 bps each in 2021.2
Investment firms charge fees in several different ways. In general, mutual fund 
managers charge fees based on a fund’s assets under management.3 Some classes 
of mutual funds, including those with reduced fees, require minimum balances. In 
contrast, institutional managers frequently offer declining percentage fees on increas -
ing account sizes for separate or commingled pool accounts. Institutional accounts 
frequently specify minimum account sizes or minimum dollar fees. Fixed-percentage 
fees facilitate managers’ and investors’ planning for future cash flows, whereas dollar 
fees are subject to the variability of asset values.
Fee structures can influence which managers will be willing to accept a particular 
investment mandate. They can also strongly affect manager behavior. Economic theory 
suggests that the principal–agent problem is complicated by the fact that an agent’s 
skills and actions are not fully visible to the principal. Although principals control 
asset availability, agents control both their expenditure of effort and portfolio risk. 
Moreover, the agent and principal may have different preferences; each might care 
about different time horizons and agents might not view losses the same way that 
principals do.4 Finally, total performance is, to some extent, beyond the control of 
either party. As a result of these factors, the principal’s and agent’s interests may not 
be fully aligned. In reality, managers are motivated to work hard even without incen -
tive fees because they want to retain current clients and expand their client base and 
pricing power. Incentives are useful, however, to help ensure that managers routinely 
act in their clients’ best interest.
1 This lesson is based on Chapter 6 in Essays on Manager Selection , by Scott D. Stewart, PhD, CFA, Research 
Foundation of CFA Institute. © 2013 CFA Institute. All rights reserved.
2 ICI Investment Company Fact Book (2022).
3 Although mutual funds may offer a declining management fee as fund assets increase, the individual 
investor does not benefit from investing more money unless the extra money qualifies the investor for a 
lower-fee fund class.
4 For a summary of theoretical research on investment compensation, see Stracca (2006) .
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 112
Assets under Management Fees
Assets under management fees, also called “ad valorem fees” (from the Latin for 
“according to value”), result from applying stated percentage rates to assets under 
management. These fees reward managers who attract and retain assets, generate 
added value, and experience benefits from rising markets. Managers primarily grow 
their assets through skillful investing, hard work, and effective marketing. A manager’s 
success, however, also results partly from luck, especially in the short term. Managers 
benefit from rising portfolio values, which are attributable to the combination of alpha 
and beta decisions, but are also, at least for long-only managers, greatly affected by 
market cycles beyond the manager’s control. A decline in ad valorem percentages as 
assets grow helps reduce the fee impact on investors from rising markets, but does 
not eliminate it.
Once a manager’s assets are large, he or she might not want to risk losing them. 
Assets are typically “sticky”—that is, once investors allocate their assets to a manager, 
the manager often does not need to generate the same level of returns to retain the 
assets as he or she did to attract them. Empirical evidence suggests this stickiness is 
the case, to some extent, for mutual fund assets. To motivate such managers to work 
harder or discourage them from closet indexing, an incentive fee determined by future 
performance may be useful.
Performance-Based Fees
Performance-based fees, common for hedge funds and less common for long-only 
strategies, are determined by portfolio returns and are designed to reward managers 
with a share of return for their skill in creating value. Performance can be calculated 
by using either total or relative return, and the return shared can be a percentage of 
total performance or performance net of a base or fixed fee. Performance-based fees 
are structured in one of three basic ways:
1. a symmetrical structure in which the manager is fully exposed to both the 
downside and upside (Computed fee = Base + Sharing of performance);
2. a bonus structure in which the manager is not fully exposed to the downside 
but is fully exposed to the upside (Computed fee = Higher of either [1] Base 
or [2] Base plus sharing of positive performance); or
3. a bonus structure in which the manager is not fully exposed to either the 
downside or the upside (Computed fee = Higher of [1] Base or [2] Base plus 
sharing of performance, to a limit).
Performance fees are paid annually or, in some cases, less frequently. These fees 
may include maximum and high-water mark (or clawback) features that protect 
investors from situations such as paying for current positive performance before the 
negative effects of prior underperformance have been offset. Private equity, hedge 
fund, and real estate partnerships commonly earn performance fees on total returns 
and typically do not limit the amount of the performance fee. Hedge funds commonly 
include high-water mark features.
Consider the example of private equity partnerships, in which base fees are com -
monly applied to committed (not just invested) capital. Performance fees are earned as 
profits are realized, and invested capital is returned to investors. A common provision 
that helps protect private equity limited partners (the investors) is a requirement that 
the limited partners receive their principal and share of profits before performance 
fees are distributed to the general partner (the manager).
Specific performance-based fee structures are designed by both clients and man -
agers. A formula is agreed upon based on the anticipated distribution of returns and 
the perceived attractiveness of the investment strategy. Managers who can command 
Management Fees 113
attractive terms, such as real estate managers that are in high demand and have limited 
capacity, have the power to stipulate the highest base fees and profit sharing in their 
fee agreements. Fee schedules are typically designed by fund managers, included in 
marketing materials, and set forth in partnership agreements. Large investors may 
influence the terms of fee schedules or negotiate side letters for special treatment.
A simple performance-based fee, as illustrated in Exhibit 8 , specifies a base fee 
below which the computed fee can never fall. In this case, the manager is protected 
against sharing for performance below 25 bps. To make the result symmetrical around 
the commonplace 50 bps fee, the manager does not share in active performance 
beyond 2.75%.
Exhibit 8: Sample Performance-Based Fee Schedule
Panel A. Sample Fee Structure
Standard fee 0.50%
Base fee 0.25%
Sharing* 20%
Breakeven active return 1.50%
Maximum annual fee 0.75%
Panel B. Numerical Examples for Annual Periods
Active Return
≤ 0.25% 1.00% 1.50% 2.00% ≥ 2.75%
Billed fee 0.25% 0.40% 0.50% 0.60% 0.75%
Net active return ≤ 0.00% 0.60% 1.00% 1.40% ≥ 2.00%
*On active return, beyond base fee.
If investment outcomes result from a mix of skill and luck (i.e., a probability distri -
bution around a positive mean alpha), then performance fees constitute risk sharing. 
Fee structures must be designed carefully to avoid favoring one party over the other. 
Performance-based fees work to align the interests of managers and investors because 
both parties share in investment results. Investors benefit by paying performance-based 
fees, rather than standard fees, when active returns are low. Managers may work harder 
to earn performance-based fees, inspiring the term “incentive based. ” Empirical evi -
dence suggests a correlation between performance-based fees and higher alphas (also, 
lower fees) for mutual funds and higher risk-adjusted returns for hedge funds.5 Asset 
managers may consider performance-based fees attractive because such fees provide 
an opportunity to enhance profits on the upside and ensure guaranteed, although 
perhaps minimal, streams of revenue from base fees when performance is poor.
Performance-based fees can also create tensions between investors and managers. 
Investors must pay base fees even when managers underperform. Management firm 
revenues decline when cash is needed to invest in operations or retain talent. In fact, 
the failure rate for poor-performing and even zero-alpha managers may tend to be 
higher when performance-based rather than standard fees are used.6
Performance-based fee structures may also lead to misestimates of portfolio risk. 
Such fee structures convert symmetrical gross active return distributions into asym -
metrical net active return distributions, reducing variability on the upside but not the 
5 See Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2003)  and Ackermann, McEnally, and Ravenscraft (1999) .
6 See Grinold and Rudd (1987) .
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 114
downside. As a result, a single standard deviation calculated on a return series that 
incorporates active returns, above and below the base fee, can lead to the underesti -
mation of downside risk.7
Investors and managers may have different incentives when performance-based 
fees are used. For example, according to a utility maximization model, fully symmet -
ric fees, in which the manager is fully exposed to the downside, tend to yield closer 
alignment in risk and effort than bonus-style fees.8 Understandably, symmetrical fee 
structures are unpopular with managers because of their impact on bankruptcy risk.
Bonus-style fees are the close equivalent of a manager’s call option on a share 
of active return, for which the base fee is the strike price. Consider Exhibit 9 , which 
shows a familiar-looking option payoff pattern using the fee parameters defined in 
Exhibit 8 . In this case, the option payoff is modified by a maximum fee feature. The 
graph illustrates three fee components: a 25 bps base fee, plus a long call option on 
active return with a strike price equal to the minimum (base) fee, minus another (less 
valuable) call option with a strike price equal to the maximum fee.
Exhibit 9: Payoff Line of Sample Performance-Based Fee Schedule
Fee
Maximum
Minimum
–5 7 –1 –3 5 3 1
Active Return (%)
Managers must retain clients year to year, avoid poor performance, and not violate 
management guidelines. But managers also tend to have an interest in increasing risk, 
which may conflict with these goals. Based on option pricing theory,9 higher volatility 
leads to higher option value, which encourages managers to assume higher portfolio 
risk. This behavior has been observed in the marketplace.10 As a result, investors, when 
possible, should carefully select benchmarks and monitor risk in their portfolios.11 
7 See Kritzman (2012) .
8 See Starks (1987) .
9 Margrabe (1978)  notes that an incentive fee (without a maximum) consists of a call option on the port -
folio and a put on the benchmark. As a result, the value depends on the volatility of the portfolio and the 
benchmark and the correlation between the two—in other words, the active risk.
10 See Elton et al. (2003) .
11 Starks (1987)  notes that an investor can simply set a fee schedule incorporating penalties for observed 
risk to align interests regarding risk levels.
Management Fees 115
Senior management at investment firms should also ensure that their compensation 
systems penalize portfolio managers for assuming excessive risk as well as reward 
them for earning superior returns.12
REAL STORY: THE CLIENT’S FREE OPTION IN A PERFORMANCE FEE 
AGREEMENT
Consider the case of an equity manager in the early 1990s offering a perfor -
mance-based fee that consisted of a 10 bp base fee and a 20% share of active 
return in excess of the benchmark index (net of the 10 bps). The fee structure 
also included a maximum annual fee provision that reserved excess fees for 
subsequent years. Because there was no penalty for cancelling the fee agreement, 
clients could opt out of the performance-based fee in exchange for a standard 
flat fee when performance was particularly strong. This arrangement allowed 
them to avoid paying the manager’s accrued, fully earned share, and is precisely 
what many clients did in the mid-1990s following a period of high active returns.
Other problems exist with performance-based fees. When managers have clients 
with varying fee structures, it is in their (short-term) interest to favor customers 
that have performance-based fees. Although doing so may be unethical or poten -
tially illegal, managers can direct trades or deals (including initial public offerings) 
to performance-fee clients to their benefit and to the detriment of others. It may be 
difficult for clients to monitor this activity. Fortunately, most managers recognize that 
such actions, once discovered, could destroy their careers or lead to criminal charges. 
Here again, due diligence, including the review of internal compliance systems, will 
help limit an investor’s exposure to unscrupulous managers.
When managers can control the timing of profit realization, as is often the case 
with private equity partnerships, they may have an incentive to hold on to assets 
until a profit can be realized. Managers may do so even when clients would benefit 
from selling assets at a loss and investing the proceeds outside of the partnership. In 
contrast, hedge fund managers have an incentive to return assets in poor-performing 
partnerships when the high-water mark is substantially above current value (i.e., 
the performance-fee option is considerably out of the money). This action results in 
the investor missing the opportunity to recoup previously paid fees based on future 
strong performance.
Funds of funds (FoFs) commonly charge fees in addition to the fees charged by the 
underlying funds.13 These fees pay for the investor’s access to the underlying funds 
and for the FoFs’ due diligence, portfolio construction, and monitoring. In addition to 
these two sets of fees, investors are required to share the profits from well-performing 
underlying funds but incur the full loss from poorly performing funds.14 To protect 
investors from paying overly high fees, hedge fund consortiums have recently begun 
to offer fee structures based on the total portfolio value of underlying funds, rather 
than the sum of fees computed at the individual fund level.
12 Although it adds a layer of complexity to the evaluation process, an active-risk-adjusted bonus formula 
can be specified.
13 When funds of funds were popular in the 2000s, it was common for them to charge a performance-based 
fee.
14 Kritzman (2012)  calls this result an “asymmetry penalty. ”
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 116
THE IMPACT OF FEE STRUCTURE ON NET RETURNS
Consider four fee structures applied to the same 12-month return series gross 
of fees:
 ■0.50% management fee, 0% performance fee
 ■0.50% management fee, 15% performance fee
 ■1.50% management fee, 0% performance fee
 ■1.50% management fee, 15% performance fee
The fees are accrued at the end of each month. This example is a simpli -
fication but illustrates the important effects of fee level and structure on net 
performance. As Exhibit 10  shows, the average monthly gross return is 0.72% 
with a 1.37% monthly standard deviation. Not surprisingly, charging a manage -
ment fee (MF) lowers the level of realized return without affecting the standard 
deviation of the series. The management fee is a constant shift in the level and 
thus does not affect volatility. The addition of a performance fee (PF) also lowers 
the level of realized returns but has the added effect of lowering the realized 
standard deviation. This dynamic occurs because in up months, the performance 
fee is accrued, and in down months, it is subtracted from the accrual balance 
to reflect the appropriate fee for the cumulative performance. This accounting 
has the effect of adjusting the monthly returns toward zero and lowering the 
measured volatility. The larger the performance fee, the more pronounced this 
effect. Exhibit 11  shows a graph of the cumulative returns for each fee structure.
 
Exhibit 10: Effects of Expense on Portfolio Performance
 
 
MonthMonthly Gross Return
MF = 0%  
PF = 0%MF = 0.5% MF = 1.5%
PF = 0% PF = 15% PF = 0% PF = 15%
1 2.00% 1.96% 1.66% 1.88% 1.59%
2 3.00% 2.96% 2.51% 2.88% 2.44%
3 −0.20% −0.24% −0.21% −0.32% −0.28%
4 −0.50% −0.54% −0.46% −0.62% −0.53%
5 0.50% 0.46% 0.39% 0.37% 0.32%
6 0.90% 0.86% 0.73% 0.77% 0.66%
7 1.00% 0.96% 0.81% 0.88% 0.74%
8 −2.00% −2.04% −1.74% −2.12% −1.81%
9 1.50% 1.46% 1.24% 1.37% 1.17%
10 2.00% 1.96% 1.66% 1.88% 1.59%
11 −0.50% −0.54% −0.46% −0.62% −0.53%
12 1.00% 0.96% 0.81% 0.88% 0.74%
Average 
Return0.72% 0.67% 0.57% 0.59% 0.50%
S.D. 1.37% 1.37% 1.16% 1.37% 1.16%
 
Management Fees 117
 
Exhibit 11: Cumulative Return
 
MF: 0%, PF: 0% MF: 0.5%, PF: 0% MF: 1.5%, PF: 0%
MF: 0.5%, PF: 15% MF: 1.5%, PF: 15%Percent
Month10
9
8
7
6
5
4
123
0
3 6 9 2 5 8 11 12 0 10 1 4 7
Given the potentially significant effect of expenses, a clear distinction must be 
drawn between performance analysis based on gross returns and net of expenses 
returns.
An additional consideration is the different degree of uncertainty between expenses 
and the potential added value of the active portfolio manager. Expenses are paid for 
certain, whereas the added value of the active strategy compared with the passive 
strategy is uncertain. For example, suppose an active strategy is expected to generate 
a gross return that is 2% greater than the passive strategy, but the cost of the active 
strategy is 2% greater than the passive strategy. A risk-averse investor would likely 
prefer the passive strategy; although the expected net return of the strategies is the 
same, the uncertainty of the outperformance would be unappealing. The riskier the 
active strategy, the greater the return volatility and the greater the volatility of the 
added value relative to the passive strategy. The significance is, the added value of 
the active strategy has to be sufficiently large and certain to justify the higher cost of 
the strategy.
In sum, the presence of positive significant average excess return is evidence 
for manager skill. This excess return, however, must be net of fees and expenses for 
the benefit of this skill to accrue to the investor.15 The preference is for more linear 
compensation to the manager to reduce the incentives to change the portfolio’s risk 
profile at inflection points.
SUMMARY
Evaluating an investment manager is a complex and detailed process. It encompasses 
a great deal more than analyzing investment returns. In conducting investment man -
ager due diligence, the focus is on understanding how the investment results were 
achieved and assessing the likelihood that the manager will continue to follow the same 
investment process that generated these returns. This process also entails operational 
15 Ultimately, the net return to the investor accounts not only for fees and expenses but also for taxes. 
This more complex issue is beyond the scope of this learning module.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 118
due diligence, including an evaluation of the integrity of the firm, its operations, and 
personnel, as well as evaluating the vehicle structure and terms. As such, due diligence 
involves both quantitative and qualitative analysis.
This learning module provides a framework that introduces and describes the 
important elements of the manager selection process:
 ■Investment manager selection involves a broad set of qualitative and quanti -
tative considerations to determine whether a manager displays skill and the 
likelihood that the manager will continue to display skill in the future.
 ■The qualitative analysis consists of investment due diligence, which evalu -
ates the manager’s investment process, investment personnel, and portfolio 
construction; and operational due diligence, which evaluates the manager’s 
infrastructure.
 ■A Type I error is hiring or retaining a manager who subsequently underper -
forms expectations—that is, rejecting the null hypothesis of no skill when 
it is correct. A Type II error is not hiring or firing a manager who subse -
quently outperforms, or performs in line with, expectations—that is, not 
rejecting the null hypothesis when it is incorrect.
 ■The manager search and selection process has three broad components: the 
universe, a quantitative analysis of the manager’s performance track record, 
and a qualitative analysis of the manager’s investment process. The quali -
tative analysis includes both investment due diligence and operational due 
diligence.
 ■Capture ratio measures the asymmetry of returns, and a ratio greater than 1 
indicates greater participation in rising versus falling markets. Drawdown is 
the loss incurred in any continuous period of negative returns.
 ■The investment philosophy is the foundation of the investment process. 
The philosophy outlines the set of assumptions about the factors that drive 
performance and the manager’s beliefs about their ability to successfully 
exploit these sources of return. The investment manager should have a 
clear and concise investment philosophy. It is important to evaluate these 
assumptions and the role they play in the investment process to understand 
how the strategy will behave over time and across market environments. 
The investment process has to be consistent and appropriate for the philos -
ophy, and the investment personnel need to possess sufficient expertise and 
experience to effectively execute the investment process.
 ■Investment teams, rather than individual investors, often have the responsi -
bility for making investment decisions and are subject to behavioral biases. 
It is important for investment teams to implement procedures to alleviate 
the effect of behavioral biases and improve decision making. An investment 
due diligence process should inquire about an investment manager’s team 
size, structure, and decision-making processes.
 ■Style analysis, understanding the manager’s risk exposures relative to the 
benchmark, is an important component of performance appraisal and man -
ager selection, helping to define the universe of suitable managers.
 ■Returns-based style analysis is a top-down approach that involves estimating 
the risk exposures from an actual return series for a given period. Although 
RBSA adds an additional analytical step, the analysis is straightforward 
and should identify the important drivers of return and risk factors for the 
Management Fees 119
period analyzed. It can be estimated even for complicated strategies and 
is comparable across managers and through time. The disadvantage is that 
RBSA is an imprecise tool, attributing performance to an unchanging aver -
age portfolio during the period that might not reflect the current or future 
portfolio exposures.
 ■Holdings-based style analysis is a bottom-up approach that estimates the 
risk exposures from the actual securities held in the portfolio at a point in 
time. HBSA allows for the estimation of current risk factors and should 
identify all important drivers of return and risk factors, be comparable 
across managers and through time, and provide an accurate view of the 
manager’s risk exposures. The disadvantages are the additional computa -
tional effort, dependence on the degree of transparency provided by the 
manager, and the possibility that accuracy may be compromised by stale 
pricing and window dressing.
 ■The prospectus, private placement memorandum, and/or limited partner -
ship agreement are, in essence, the contract between the investor and the 
manager, outlining each party’s rights and responsibilities. The provisions 
are liquidity terms and fees. Limited liquidity reduces the investor’s flexi -
bility to adjust portfolio allocations in light of changing market conditions 
or investor circumstances. On the other hand, limited liquidity allows the 
funds to take long-term views and hold less liquid securities with reduced 
risk of having to divest assets at inopportune times in response to redemp -
tion requests. A management fee lowers the level of realized return without 
affecting the standard deviation, whereas a performance fee has the added 
effect of lowering the realized standard deviation. The preference is for more 
linear compensation to reduce the incentives to change the portfolio’s risk 
profile at inflection points.
 ■The choice between individual separate accounts and pooled (or commin -
gled) vehicles is dependent upon the consistency with the investment pro -
cess, the suitability for the investor IPS, and whether the benefits outweigh 
the additional costs.
 ■Investment management fees take one of two forms: a fixed percentage 
fee based on assets under management or a performance-based fee which 
charges a percentage of the portfolio’s total return or excess return over a 
benchmark or hurdle rate. Performance-based fees work to align the inter -
ests of managers and investors because both parties share in investment 
results. Most managers that charge a performance fee also charge some level 
of fixed percentage fee to aid business continuity efforts. Fee structures must 
be designed carefully to avoid favoring one party over the other.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 120
REFERENCES
Ackermann, Carl, Richard McEnally, and David Ravenscraft. 1999. “The Performance 
of Hedge Funds: Risk, Return and Incentives. ” Journal of Finance  54 (3): 833–74. 
10.1111/0022-1082.00129
Bär, M., C. S. Ciccotello, and S. Ruenzi. 2010. “Risk Management and Team-Managed Mutual 
Funds. ” Journal of Risk Management and Financial Institutions  4 (1): 57–73.
Baer, M., A. Kempf, and S. Ruenzi. 2005. “Team Management and Mutual Funds. ” Working 
paper, Centre for Financial Research. 10.2139/ssrn.809484
Bliss, R. T., M. E. Potter, and C. Schwarz. 2008. “Performance Characteristics of 
Individual-Managed versus Team-Managed Funds. ” Journal of Portfolio Management  34 (3): 
110–19. 10.3905/jpm.2008.706248
Chen, J., H. Harrison, H. Ming, and J. Kubik. 2004. “Does Fund Size Erode Mutual Fund 
Performance: The Role of Liquidity and Organization. ” American Economic Review  94 (5): 
1276–302. 10.1257/0002828043052277
Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber, Christopher Blake. 2003. “Incentive Fees and Mutual Funds. ” 
Journal of Finance  58 (2): 779–804. 10.1111/1540-6261.00545
Goldman, E., Z. Sun. and X. (T.) Zhou. 2016. “The Effect of Management Design on the Portfolio 
Concentration and Performance of Mutual Funds. ” Financial Analysts Journal  72 (4): 49–61. 
10.2469/faj.v72.n4.9
Grinold, Richard and Andrew Rudd. 1987. “Incentive Fees: Who Wins? Who Loses?” Financial 
Analysts Journal  43 (1): 27–38. 10.2469/faj.v43.n1.27
Karagiannidis, I. 2010. “Management Team Structure and Mutual Fund Performance. ” Journal 
of Financial Markets, Institutions and Money  20 (2): 197–211. 10.1016/j.intfin.2009.10.003
Karagiannidis, Iordanis and G. Geoffrey Booth. 2022. “The Influence of Management Design on 
Mutual Fund Performance. ” Multinational Finance Journal  26 (1/2): 1–26.
Khandani, Amir E. and Andrew W. Lo. 2011. “What Happened to the Quants in August 2007? 
Evidence from Factors and Transactions Data. ” Journal of Financial Markets  14 (1): 1–46. 
10.1016/j.finmar.2010.07.005
Kritzman, Mark. 2012. “Two Things about Performance Fees. ” Journal of Portfolio Management  
38 (2): 4–5. 10.3905/jpm.2012.38.2.004
Kuenzi, David E. 2003. “Strategy Benchmarks. ” Journal of Portfolio Management  29 (2): 46–56. 
10.3905/jpm.2003.319872
Lo, Andrew W. 2004. “The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis: Market Efficiency from an Evolutionary 
Perspective. ” Journal of Portfolio Management  30 (5): 15–29. 10.3905/jpm.2004.442611
Margrabe, William. 1978. “The Value of an Option to Exchange One Asset for Another. ” Journal 
of Finance  33 (1): 177–86. 10.1111/j.1540-6261.1978.tb03397.x
Patel, S. and S. Sarkissian. 2017. “To Group or Not to Group? Evidence from Mutual Fund 
Databases. ” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis  52 (5): 1989–2021. 10.1017/
S0022109017000655
Payne, John and Arnold Wood. 2002. “Individual Decision Making and Group Decision 
Processes. ” Journal of Psychology and Financial Markets  3 (2): 94–101. 10.1207/
S15327760JPFM0302_04
Sargis, M. and K. Chang. 2017. The Aftermath of Fund Management Change. Morningstar.
Starks, Laura. 1987. “Performance Incentive Fees: An Agency Theoretic Approach. ” Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis  22 (1): 17–32. 10.2307/2330867
Stewart, Scott D., John J. Neumann, Christopher R. Knittel, and Jeffrey Heisler. 2009. “ Absence 
of Value: An Analysis of Investment Allocation Decisions by Institutional Plan Sponsors. ” 
Financial Analysts Journal  65 (6): 34–51. 10.2469/faj.v65.n6.4
Stracca, Livio. 2006. “Delegated Portfolio Management: A Survey of the Theoretical Literature. ” 
Journal of Economic Surveys  20 (5): 823–48. 10.1111/j.1467-6419.2006.00271.x
Wang, D. 2016. “What Does It Mean to Be a Team? Evidence from U.S. Mutual Fund Managers. ” 
29th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Sydney, Australia. 10.2139/ssrn.2825534
Zuckerman, Gregory. 2008. “Fees, Even Returns and Auditor All Raised Red Flags. ” Wall Street 
Journal  (13 December).
Practice Problems 121
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Which of the following qualitative considerations is most  associated with deter -
mining whether investment manager selection will result in superior repeatable 
performance? 
A. Transparency
B. Investment process
C. Operational process
2. The manager selection process begins by defining the universe of feasible manag -
ers. When defining this manager universe, the selection process should avoid:
A. excluding managers based on historical risk-adjusted returns.
B. identifying the benchmark against which managers will be evaluated.
C. using third-party categorizations of managers to find those that might fill 
the desired role in the portfolio.
The following information relates to questions 
3-5
John Connell inherited $700,000 at the beginning of the year and has been devel -
oping related investment goals and policies with a financial adviser. The adviser 
has identified three potential investment funds for consideration. All three have 
earned similar returns over the last five years and are expected to earn similar re -
turns going forward. Publishing their investment results on a timely and routine 
basis, they include the following asset classes:
 ■US equities
 ■Global equities
 ■Venture capital
 ■Corporate bonds
 ■Government bonds
 ■Cash reserves
Exhibit 1  presents information about the funds.
Exhibit 1: Fund Characteristics
Characteristic Zeta Eta Theta
Organization Independent investment 
fundPart of a medium-sized invest -
ment firm with multiple fundsPart of a large investment firm that 
rotates investment professionals 
among funds
Team Size Small Small Small
Staff Turnover High Medium Low
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 122
Characteristic Zeta Eta Theta
Incentive Compensation Salary adjustment when 
returns exceed benchmarkAnnual salary adjustment Annual salary adjustment and 
performance-based bonus
Key People Founder directs all trades 
and investment decisionsFund manager and assistant 
fund manager make invest -
ment decisionsFund manager and assistant fund 
manager lead team in selecting 
investments
Longevity/Experience Founder in the investment 
business for > 25 yearsFund manager in the invest -
ment business for > 15 years; 
assistant fund manager for > 
12 yearsFund manager in the investment 
business for > 20 years; assistant 
fund manager for > 10 years. Fund 
family is more than 50 years old.
3. Based on the Exhibit 1  data, which fund is most appropriate  for Connell’s needs. 
Justify your selection with two reasons.
4. Connell elects to defer fund selection and places his inheritance in a short-term 
money market account. A year later, Connell reviews the one-year performance 
results of the three funds compared to the benchmark, as shown in Exhibit 2 .
Exhibit 2: Fund Performance Compared to Benchmark*
Fund Underperforms In Line Outperforms
Zeta X
Eta X
Theta X
*Assume performance is mean reverting within this period.
Connell believes he now has two main alternatives for fund investment:
Alternative 1 Keep his inheritance in the money market account to avoid the 
Eta fund.
Alternative 2 Place his inheritance in the Theta fund.
Identify the type of error Connell is at risk of committing and its associated cost 
for each  alternative. Justify your selection.
5. Connell asks the adviser about the conditions under which any form of style anal -
ysis would be useful for understanding the funds he is considering.
Identify the conditions under which the adviser would find style analysis most  
useful.
The following information relates to questions 
6-7
Donna Grimmett is working with a financial adviser to establish her investment 
goals for €850,000, which she recently earned as a bonus. She asks the adviser 
about how to best select a manager for her funds.
The adviser responds that both qualitative and quantitative components are 
Practice Problems 123
involved in outlining a framework for identifying, evaluating, and ultimately 
selecting a manager.
6. Describe two considerations for each  type of component recommended to Grim -
mett for her manager selection process.
7. Grimmett asks the adviser if any other preparatory steps should be taken before 
choosing the best investment manager(s). The adviser produces a checklist relat -
ed to manager selection in response to Grimmett’s question.
8. A decision-making investor is most likely  to worry more about making a Type I 
error than a Type II error because:
A. Type II errors are errors of mistaken rejection.
B. Type I errors are more easily measured.
C. Type II errors are more likely to have to be explained as to why a skilled 
manager was fired.
9. An investor is considering hiring three managers who have the following skill 
levels:
Manager Large-cap skill level Small-cap skill level 
1 Skilled Unskilled
2 Skilled Skilled
3 Unskilled Unskilled
Type I and Type II errors both occur when the investor is:
A. hiring Manager 1 for large-cap stocks and not hiring Manager 3 for 
small-cap stocks.
B. hiring Manager 3 for large-cap stocks and not hiring Manager 2 for 
small-cap stocks.
C. hiring Manager 3 for large-cap stocks and not hiring Manager 1 for 
small-cap stocks.
10. A return distribution of skilled managers that is highly distinct from the return 
distribution of unskilled managers, most likely  implies a:
A. highly efficient market.
B. low opportunity cost of not hiring a skilled manager.
C. high opportunity cost of not hiring a skilled manager.
11. Boinic Corporation introduced an employee pension plan and set aside $20 mil -
lion to fund the plan. Assessing five investment management firms, A through E, 
and expecting all to perform in line with their benchmarks, Boinic selected three 
firms (A, D, and E) to manage part of the pension plan assets. Exhibit 1  shows the 
managers’ performance compared to their benchmark in the one year after being 
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 124
selected.
Exhibit 1: Y ear 1 Investment Firm Performance versus Benchmark
Firm A Firm B Firm C Firm D Firm E
Year 1 performance versus 
benchmarkAbove Above Below Below Above
On analyzing these results, Boinic determines that it has made both a Type I and 
Type II error.
Identify the firm associated with Boinic’s Type I and Type II error. Justify your 
selection for each  error type, discussing the psychological effects of its Year 1 
performance on Boinic. 
12. Suppose that the results of a style analysis for an investment manager are not 
consistent with the stated philosophy of the manager and the manager’s stated 
investment process. These facts suggest the:
A. absence of style drift.
B. investment process may not be repeatable.
C. manager should be included in the universe of potential managers.
13. Compared with holdings-based style analysis (HBSA), a returns-based style anal -
ysis (RBSA):
A. is subject to window dressing.
B. requires less effort to acquire data.
C. is more accurate when illiquid securities are present.
14. A manager has a mandate to be fully invested with a benchmark that is a blend 
of large-cap stocks and investment-grade bonds. Which of the following is not an 
indication that style drift has occurred? The manager:
A. initiates an allocation to small-cap stocks.
B. decreases investments in investment-grade corporate bonds.
C. increases allocation to cash in anticipation of a market decline.
15. An advantage of a returns-based style analysis is that such analysis:
A. is comparable across managers.
B. is suitable for portfolios that contain illiquid securities.
C. can effectively profile a manager’s risk exposures using a short return series.
16. Which of the following types of style analysis use(s) a bottom-up approach to 
estimate the risk exposures in a portfolio?
A. Returns-based style analysis only
B. Holdings-based style analysis only
Practice Problems 125
C. Both return-based and holdings-based style analysis
17. A manager whose relative performance is worse during market downturns most 
likely  has a capture ratio that is:
A. less than one.
B. equal to one.
C. greater than one.
18. In a quarter, an investment manager’s upside capture is 75% and downside cap -
ture is 125%. We can conclude that the manager underperforms the benchmark:
A. only when the benchmark return is positive.
B. only when the benchmark return is negative.
C. when the benchmark return is either positive or negative.
The following information relates to questions 
19-20
Cassandra Yang, age 59, is a manager at a large US manufacturing firm. Yang 
is single, owns a home, is debt free, and saves 20% of her pre-tax income in a 
company retirement plan and 15% of her after-tax income in a short-term money 
market account. Her accounts are self-directed; Yang makes all related decisions 
independently.
While Yang hates to suffer investment losses, she now seeks higher returns on 
80% of the funds in her money market account. To help achieve her goal of retir -
ing within three years, she is considering the actively managed investment funds 
listed in Exhibit 1 .
Exhibit 1: Return Profile Summary
FundUpside 
CaptureDownside 
CaptureMost Recent Draw -
down LossMost Recent Drawdown 
Duration
Alpha 80 20 57% 21 months
Beta 55 45 38% 15 months
Gamma 50 50 28% 12 months
19. Select the best fund for Yang, using only the information provided. Justify your 
selection.
20. Yang is also considering Aspen Investments (Aspen) for a portion of her mon -
ey market funds. Aspen’s investment philosophy states: “We pursue a passive 
investment strategy, which seeks to identify and exploit structural inefficiencies 
through identifying mispricings created by loss aversion. Our strategy and philos -
ophy have evolved over time in response to fund and market performance. ”
Determine whether Yang is likely to judge that Aspen follows a consistent invest -
ment philosophy, using only the information provided. Justify your response with 
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 126
two reasons.
21. Which of the following is consistent with the expectation that exploiting a struc -
tural inefficiency is repeatable?
A. The inefficiency is a unique event that occurs infrequently.
B. The level of gross return is equal to the amount of transaction costs and 
expenses.
C. The aggregate value of all assets affected by the inefficiency is larger than the 
AUM of the manager and its competitors.
22. Susan Patnode, age 66, was recently widowed and received £2,000,000 from a 
spousal life insurance policy. Patnode would like to invest the proceeds to gener -
ate predictable income to cover her ongoing living expenses.
Patnode is considering three investment managers, Laurbær Partners, Alcanfor 
Limited, and Mylesten Management, to manage the insurance policy proceeds. 
All three take an active investment approach. Further information regarding each 
of the investment manager’s investment philosophy and approach is provided in 
Exhibit 1 .
Exhibit 1: Information on Investment Manager Philosophy/Approach
Investment Manager Investment Philosophy/Approach
Laurbær Partners Seeks to produce returns through investing in new investment 
themes and emphasizes measuring the contribution of each to 
performance.
Alcanfor Limited Seeks to produce returns through investing in securities that 
appear to be mispriced in their industry sectors and tracks 
their ultimate performance against market benchmarks.
Mylesten Management Seeks to produce returns through investing with maximum 
flexibility to the most popular investor sentiments worldwide
Identify which investment manager is most  suitable for Patnode. Justify your 
response based solely on each  manager’s investment philosophy and approach.
23. Which of the following statements is consistent with the manager adhering to a 
stated investment philosophy and investment decision-making process?
A. Senior investment team members have left to form their own firm.
B. A senior employee has been cited by the SEC for violating insider trading 
regulations.
C. A large drawdown occurs because of an unforeseen political event in a for -
eign country.
Practice Problems 127
The following information relates to questions 
24-25
Frances Lute is an investment manager for a large institutional investment 
management firm in London. His client, Parade University (Parade), has an 
endowment worth approximately GBP1.6 billion. Lute is considering three active 
investment managers in order to add one new style. Parade’s investment policy 
statement (IPS) highlights the endowment’s preference for low turnover and trad -
ing costs.
Lute is particularly concerned about portfolio construction and the prospective 
implementation of investments within the portfolio. All else equal, Lute has 
identified these distinguishing characteristics for the processes affecting portfolio 
construction by the three managers.
 ■Manager A uses hard-stop losses to manage risk.
 ■Manager B’s portfolio can be liquidated within five business days or less.
 ■Manager C’s portfolio turnover is greater than the frequency of signals 
generated.
24. Identify which manager is most  appropriate for Parade. Justify your response.
25. Upon choosing a manager, Lute must allocate the funds either to a separately 
managed account (SMA) customized for Parade or a pooled vehicle called Diver -
sified. In addition to low turnover and trading costs, Parade’s IPS also prioritizes 
the following characteristics for its investment: transparency, investor behavior, 
cost, liquidity, and tracking risk. While each type of investment vehicle offers 
distinct advantages, Parade is unclear as to which advantage is applicable by type.
Identify which investment vehicle best addresses each  characteristic highlighted 
in Parade’s IPS. Justify your response.
26. Brickridge Investment Consultants meets weekly to review the positives and neg -
atives of investment managers being considered for client portfolios. In the latest 
meeting, analyst Brad Moore discusses investment manager Lyon Management 
(Lyon). His in-depth analysis of one of Lyon’s investment strategies includes the 
following summary details: 
detail 1 Long and short positions are paired.
detail 2 Investment strategy relies on unique information.
detail 3 AUM connected with the strategy have grown substantially, while 
the number and characteristics of positions have stayed the same.
Asked about Lyon’s regulatory context, Moore states, “The regulatory environ -
ment is strong and seeks to decrease information symmetries. ”
Identify whether each detail from Moore’s summary is most likely  a benefit or a 
drawback of the strategy. Justify your selection.
27. Which of the following is most likely  a key consideration in investment due 
diligence?
A. Suitability of the investment vehicle
B. Back office processes and procedures
C. Depth of expertise and experience of investment personnel
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 128
28. Which of the following is not a reason that an investor might favor a separately 
managed account rather than a pooled vehicle? The investor:
A. is tax exempt.
B. requires real-time details on investment positions.
C. has expressed certain constraints and preferences for the portfolio.
29. Which of the following investment vehicles provide investors with the highest 
degree of liquidity?
A. Open-end funds
B. Private equity funds
C. Limited partnerships
30. An investor should prefer a pooled investment vehicle to a separately managed 
account when she:
A. is cost sensitive.
B. focuses on tax efficiency.
C. requires clear legal ownership of assets.
31. Which of the following investment types is the most liquid?
A. ETFs
B. Hedge funds
C. Private equity funds
The following information relates to questions 
32-34
Jack Porter and Melissa Smith are co-managers for the Circue Library Founda -
tion (Circue) in Canada. Within the next six months, Porter and Smith will be 
replacing one of Circue’s underperforming active managers. This choice will 
rely on the terms of investment management contracts—specifically, liquidity 
and management fee structure. Circue’s IPS indicates some tolerance for lower 
liquidity, a moderate sensitivity to management fees, and a heightened sensitivity 
to closet indexing.
Circue is considering the following three investment vehicles with distinct fee 
structures:
 ■Hedge funds with a soft lock
 ■Open-end funds with an incentive fee
 ■Closed-end funds with no incentive fee
32. Determine which of the three investment vehicles is most  appropriate for Circue’s 
IPS. Justify your response.
33. Porter and Smith next consider how the performance-based fee structures of the 
Practice Problems 129
prospective managers may affect portfolio risk.
Porter states: “I’ve noticed more managers are applying a bonus structure in 
which the manager is not fully exposed to the downside but is fully exposed to 
the upside. ”
Smith states: “Circue’s current market view is that there are increasing risks to 
the downside. ”
Discuss how Smith’s stated expectation would be reflected in estimated portfolio 
risk under the fee structure identified by Porter.
34. After narrowing their choice to three managers with different fee structures, Por -
ter and Smith analyze the effect of the performance-based fee structure for each 
manager. Exhibit 1  provides applicable data for one of the managers.
Exhibit 1: Selected Performance-Based Fee Data for a 
Prospective Manager
Fee Structure Fee (%)
Standard Fee 0.35
Base Fee 0.20
Sharing* 0.25
Breakeven Active Return 1.25
Maximum Annual Fee 0.90
*On active return, beyond base fee.
To understand the effect each fee structure has on its respective portfolio, Porter 
and Smith must estimate the net active return for several possible gross active 
returns, including less than or equal to 0.20%, 0.75%, 1.25%, and 1.75%.
Calculate the net active return based on each possible gross active return provid -
ed using the selected data in Exhibit 1. Show your calculations.
35. Institutional investment consultant Wilsot Consultants (Wilsot) is reviewing 
multiple investment managers within a prospective client’s portfolio. Two of 
the managers, Vaudreuil Capital Management (Vaudreuil) and Pourtir Invest -
ments (Pourtir), have similar strategies that show comparable performance on 
a net-of-fees basis. Assessing the portfolio effects of management fees, a Wilsot 
analyst reviews both manager contracts to determine their advantages and dis -
advantages to the client. Checking client fee structures, the analyst notes Vau -
dreuil’s fees are AUM-based while Pourtir’s are performance-based.
Discuss one advantage and one disadvantage to the client of each  manager’s con -
tracted fee structure.
36. Which of the following fee structures most likely  decreases the volatility of a 
portfolio’s net returns?
A. Incentive fees only
B. Management fees only
C. Neither incentive fees nor management fees
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 130
The following information relates to questions 
37-42
The Tree Fallers Endowment plans to allocate part of its portfolio to alternative 
investment funds. The endowment has hired Kurt Summer, a consultant at Sum -
mer Brothers Consultants, to identify suitable alternative investment funds for its 
portfolio.
Summer has identified three funds for potential investment and will present the 
performance of these investments to the endowment’s board of directors at their 
next quarterly meeting.
Summer is reviewing each of the fund’s fee schedules and is concerned about the 
manager’s incentive to take on excess risk in an attempt to generate a higher fee. 
Exhibit 1  presents the fee schedules of the three funds.
Exhibit 1: Fee Schedules
Fund Computed Fee Base Fee SharingMaximum 
Annual Fee
Red Grass 
FundHigher of either (1) base or (2) 
base plus sharing of positive 
performance; sharing is based 
on return net of the base fee.1.00% 20% na
Blue Water 
FundHigher of either (1) base 
or (2) base plus sharing of 
positive performance, up to 
a maximum annual fee of 
2.50%; sharing is based on 
active return.0.50% 20% 2.50%
Yellow Wood 
FundBase plus sharing of both 
positive and negative perfor -
mance; sharing is based on 
return net of the base fee.1.50% 20% na
Exhibit 2  presents the annual gross returns for each fund and its respective 
benchmark for the period of 2016–2018. All funds have an inception date of 
1 January 2016. Summer intends to include in his report an explanation of the 
impact of the fee structures of the three funds on returns.
Exhibit 2: Fund and Benchmark Returns
Fund2016 2017 2018
Gross 
Return (%)Benchmark 
Return (%)Gross 
Return (%)Benchmark 
Return (%)Gross 
Return (%)Benchmark 
Return (%)
Red Grass Fund 8.00 8.00 −2.00 −10.00 5.00 4.50
Blue Water Fund 10.00 9.00 −4.00 −1.50 14.00 2.00
Yellow Wood 
Fund15.00 14.00 −5.00 −6.50 7.00 9.50
The board of directors of the Tree Fallers Endowment asks Summer to recalcu -
Practice Problems 131
late the fees of the Red Grass Fund assuming a high-water mark feature whereby 
a sharing percentage could only be charged to the extent any losses had been 
recouped.
37. Based on Exhibit 1 , which fund has a symmetrical fee structure?
A. Red Grass
B. Blue Water
C. Yellow Wood
38. Based on the fee schedules in Exhibit 1 , the portfolio manager of which fund 
has the greatest incentive to assume additional risk to earn a higher investment 
management fee?
A. Red Grass
B. Blue Water
C. Yellow Wood
39. Based on Exhibit 1  and Exhibit 2 , the Yellow Wood Fund’s 2016 investment man -
agement fee is:
A. 3.00%.
B. 4.20%.
C. 4.50%.
40. Based on Exhibit 1  and Exhibit 2 , the Red Grass Fund’s 2017 investment manage -
ment fee is:
A. 0.40%.
B. 1.00%.
C. 2.60%.
41. Based on Exhibit 1  and Exhibit 2 , the Blue Water Fund’s 2018 investment man -
agement fee is:
A. 2.40%
B. 2.50%.
C. 2.90%
42. In which year would the Red Grass Fund’s investment management fee be affect -
ed by Summer’s recalculation using the high-water mark?
A. 2016
B. 2017
C. 2018
43. At a meeting for the local municipal pension fund, a group of beneficiaries 
expressed concern about current investment management fees. The beneficia -
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 132
ries asked the Investment Committee for a fee summary of each manager in the 
portfolio. 
The next day, a pension fund staff member briefed the Committee on the manag -
ers’ full contracted fee schedules. The Committee was surprised to hear that the 
managers work under numerous different fee structures and rates. A sample of 
these fee schedules for two managers is provided in Exhibit 1 : 
Exhibit 1: Fee Schedules for Selected Managers: Hidden 
Lake and Carpenter Management
Fee Type Hidden Lake Carpenter Management
Base Fee 0.30% 0.18%*
Sharing** 15% 20%
Maximum Annual Fee N/A 0.80%
*Minimum fee.
**On active return, beyond base fee.
In explaining the differences, the staff member said that fee structures may lead 
to misestimates of portfolio risk. She also noted that performance-based fees 
sometimes are a close equivalent to a manager’s call option on active return.
Identify which manager’s fee structure is most  similar to a call option on a share 
of active return. Justify your selection.
Solutions 133
SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct. A critical element of manager selection is to assess if the investment 
process is superior, repeatable, and can be consistently applied.
2. A is correct. The focus of the initial screening process is on building a universe of 
managers that could potentially satisfy the identified portfolio need and should 
not focus on historical performance. Identifying a benchmark is a key component 
of defining the manager’s role in the portfolio, and third-party categorizations are 
an efficient way to build an initial universe which can then be further refined.
3. The Theta fund, which is managed by an investment team rather than a single 
manager (as at Zeta) or by two managers (as at Eta), has lower key person risk. 
If the single manager at Zeta leaves or either manager at Eta leaves, the fund’s 
performance could suffer.
The Theta fund has the lowest level of staff turnover among the three funds. This 
higher level of personnel continuity limits the risk of the loss of institutional 
knowledge and experience within the investment team.
The Theta fund offers a more attractive compensation package than Eta or Zeta. 
This incentivizes its investment professionals to stay at Theta, leading to greater 
longevity and experience over time. Additionally, Theta’s package, unlike those of 
the other funds, will directly increase the rewards to its managers when per -
formance exceeds benchmarks. This better aligns their interests with those of 
Connell.
4. Alternative 1
If Connell avoids the Eta fund because of its recent underperformance, with 
performance reverting to the mean, he is at risk of making a Type II error (by not 
retaining managers with skill). A Type II error is an error of failing to detect a 
true relationship, or in this case, the opportunity cost associated with not hiring 
Eta and seeing its performance improve.
Alternative 2
If Connell selects the Theta fund because of its recent superior performance, with 
performance reverting to the mean, he is at risk of making a Type I error. A Type 
I error occurs when hiring or retaining a manager who subsequently underper -
forms expectations. The cost of a Type I error is explicit and relatively straightfor -
ward to measure.
In deciding which fund to hire, the goal is to avoid making decisions based on 
short-term performance (trend following) and to identify evidence of behavioral 
biases in the evaluation of managers during the selection process.
5. The adviser would find style analysis most useful, whether it be returns-based 
(RBSA) or holdings-based (HBSA), when applied to strategies that hold 
publicly-traded securities where pricing is frequent. It can be applied to other 
strategies (hedge funds and private equity, for example), but the insights drawn 
from a style analysis of such strategies are more likely to be used for designing 
additional lines of inquiry in the course of due diligence rather than for confirma -
tion of the investment process.
In addition, style analysis, whether returns-based or holdings-based, must be 
meaningful, accurate, consistent, and timely in order to be useful. Accordingly, 
style analysis would be most useful to Connell in understanding most of the asset 
classes in the funds he is considering, including the equities and bonds. However, 
it would be less meaningful for evaluating the venture capital assets since they are 
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 134
not traded and are thus illiquid.
6. Qualitative
Process and people: Evaluating the manager’s investment process, including the 
manager’s philosophy, process, people, and portfolio. This consideration is broad -
ly described as part of “investment due diligence. ” 
Operational due diligence: Evaluating the manager’s infrastructure and firm, 
including the accuracy of the manager’s track record and whether the record 
fully reflects risks; the back office processes and procedures; the terms and if they 
are acceptable and appropriate for the strategy and vehicle; and the firm’s profit -
ability, its culture, and if it’s likely to remain in business. This and the following 
bulleted considerations as a whole are broadly described as part of “operational 
due diligence”:
• Investment vehicle: Is the investment vehicle suitable for the portfolio need?
• Terms: Are the terms acceptable and appropriate for the strategy and vehicle?
• Monitoring: Does the manager continue to be the “best” fit for the portfolio 
need?
Quantitative: 
Attribution and appraisal: To assess if the manager has displayed skill in 
investing.
The capture ratio: How has the manager performed in “up” versus “down” 
markets?
Drawdown: Does the return distribution exhibit large drawdowns?
7. Grimmett, with her adviser, would ensure the following tasks were performed 
prior to manager selection:
• Decide that outside support is necessary.
• Complete an investment policy statement (IPS).
• Determine the appropriate asset allocation.
Short of these key actions, Grimmett will be unable to identify the managers who 
fit her needs, confirm that the managers are suitable for her IPS, and be confident 
that they will act upon the appropriate asset allocation.
8. B is correct. Type I errors are more easily measured than Type II errors. In 
addition, Type I errors may be linked to the compensation of the decision maker. 
Type I errors are errors of mistaken rejection, whereas Type II are errors failing 
to detect a true relationship. Firing a skilled manager is less transparent to the 
investor.
9. B is correct. Hiring unskilled Manager 3 for large-cap stocks is an error of 
mistaken rejection or Type I error, whereas not hiring skilled Manager 2 for 
small-cap stocks is an error of failing to detect a true relationship or Type II error.
10. C is correct. When the two distributions are highly distinct, the unskilled man -
agers are expected to significantly underperform the skilled managers, implying 
a high opportunity cost of not hiring the skilled managers. Efficient markets 
are likely to exhibit smaller differences of returns between skilled and unskilled 
managers.
11. Type I: 
Hiring Firm D, which later underperformed expectations, resulted in a Type I er -
ror. A Type I error occurs when a manager is hired or retained who subsequently 
underperforms expectations. This situation involves rejecting the null hypothesis 
of no skill when it is correct.
Solutions 135
It is most likely Boinic will find its hiring of Firm D to be psychologically 
troubling.
Decision makers appear predisposed to worry more about Type I errors than 
Type II errors. Potential reasons for this focus are as follows:
 ■Psychologically, people seek to avoid feelings of regret. Type I errors are 
errors of mistaken rejection, active decisions that turn out to be incorrect, 
whereas Type II errors are errors of failing to detect a true relationship. 
Type I errors create explicit costs, whereas Type II errors create opportunity 
costs. Because individuals appear to put less weight on opportunity costs, 
Type I errors are psychologically more painful than Type II errors.
 ■Type I errors are more transparent to investors, so they entail not only the 
regret of an incorrect decision but the pain of having to explain this deci -
sion to the investor. Type II errors, such as firing (or not hiring) a manager 
with skill, are less transparent to investors—unless the investor tracks fired 
managers or evaluates the universe themselves.
Type II: 
Not hiring Firm B, which later outperformed expectations, resulted in a Type II 
error. A Type II error occurs when a manager who subsequently outperforms, or 
performs in line with, expectations is not hired. This situation involves not reject -
ing an incorrect null hypothesis. As noted previously, a Type II error is typically 
less psychologically troubling than a Type I error.
The other three decisions did not result in either a Type I or Type II error.
12. B is correct. The results of the returns-based style analysis and the 
holdings-based style analysis should be consistent with the philosophy of the 
manager and the investment process. If this is not the case, it may suggest that 
the process is not repeatable or not consistently implemented. For these results, 
the manager should not be included in the universe of potential managers, 
whereas if the results track over time, they may suggest style drift.
13. B is correct. RBSA typically does not require a large amount of additional, or 
difficult to acquire, data. HBSA requires data on each security in the investment 
portfolio. HBSA is a snapshot of the portfolio at a single point of time and thus 
is subject to window dressing. Both HBSA and RBSA are subject to difficulties in 
interpreting returns when illiquid securities are present.
14. B is correct. In the normal course of business, the manager conforms to its 
style by reducing exposure to some class of investment grade bonds. Increasing 
allocation to cash and small-cap stocks is in violation of the mandate to be fully 
invested with equity exposure to large-cap stocks.
15. A is correct. Returns-based style analysis on portfolios of liquid assets is generally 
able to identify the important drivers of return and the relevant risk factors for 
the period analyzed, even for complicated strategies. In addition, the process is 
comparable across managers and through time. If the portfolio contains illiquid 
securities, the lack of current prices on those positions may lead to an underesti -
mation of the portfolio’s volatility in a returns-based style analysis. Longer return 
series generally provide a more accurate estimate of the manager’s underlying 
standard deviation of return.
16. B is correct. Holdings-based style analysis estimates the portfolio’s risk expo -
sures using the securities held in the portfolio (a bottom-up approach), whereas 
returns-based style analysis uses portfolio returns to estimate a portfolio’s sensi -
tivities to security market indexes (a top-down approach).
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 136
17. A is correct. A capture ratio less than one indicates the downside capture is 
greater than upside capture and reflects greater participation in falling markets 
than in rising markets.
18. C is correct. Upside capture of 75% suggests that the manager only gained 75% of 
benchmark increase when the benchmark return was positive. Downside capture 
of 125% suggests that the manager lost 125% as much as the benchmark when 
the benchmark return was negative. Therefore, the manager underperformed the 
benchmark in both scenarios.
19. With Yang hoping to retire in three years and not wanting to suffer investment 
losses, she has less time to recover from losses than someone with a longer time 
horizon. Yang should seek a fund with a shallower and shorter expected draw -
down. The Gamma fund has the smallest drawdown and the shortest drawdown 
duration.
20. Passive strategies seek to earn risk premiums, which are defined as the return in 
excess of a minimal risk (“risk-free”) rate of return that accrues to bearing a risk 
that is not easily diversified away—so-called systematic risk. Active strategies, in 
contrast, assume markets are sufficiently inefficient that security mispricings can 
be identified and exploited.
So, in assessing Aspen, Yang first would find its investment philosophy to be 
inconsistent because it states an active strategy but labels its strategy as a pas -
sive one. Aspen is unable to clearly and consistently articulate its investment 
philosophy.
Yang would also note that Aspen has altered its investment philosophy over time 
in response to market performance. This suggests Aspen is reacting to markets, 
not pursuing a consistent philosophy. With this approach, Aspen’s performance 
results may not be repeatable.
21. C is correct. Given the amount of inefficient assets compared with the AUM of 
managers likely to exploit them provides some assurance that the inefficiency is 
repeatable. It would likely take some time for the inefficiency to converge to ef -
ficient valuation. The infrequent nature of the inefficiency and the zero marginal 
return suggest that the inefficiency is probably not worthwhile to pursue.
22. Given Patnode’s goal of predictably covering expenses and given the choice 
among these three active managers to invest her insurance policy proceeds, 
Laurbær is most suitable. Laurbær recognizes its strategy is exposed to poten -
tially being arbitraged away and is more likely to evolve over time to deliver the 
ongoing returns desired by Patnode.
Alcanfor and Mylesten, in contrast, are making more generic claims that have a 
weaker foundation for long-term results. Alcanfor is making its judgments based 
on performance in industry sectors but is judging effectiveness based on overall 
market benchmarks. This is not providing evidence related to success within its 
selection domain but instead gauging itself against a broader market standard. 
Mylesten is offering a more ad hoc reaction to changing market conditions and 
investment flows, suggesting a lack of repeatability and robustness. So, both of 
them would have greater uncertainty as to the production of the income Patnode 
needs.
23. C is correct. A large drawdown that results from an unforeseen event is explain -
able as a single isolated event that does not prohibit the manager from adhering 
to its investment philosophy and process. The events of senior team members 
leaving to form their own investment firm and an insider trading investigation by 
the SEC call into question the ability of the firm to adhere to its philosophy and 
Solutions 137
decision-making process.
24. All else equal, Manager B is most appropriate for Parade because the portfolio is 
liquid. That will reduce trading costs in comparison to a portfolio consisting of 
illiquid securities. Investment strategies not intending to capture a liquidity risk 
premium must be aware of portfolio liquidity. An existing portfolio consisting 
of illiquid securities will be more costly to change, not only to take advantage of 
new opportunities but also to trade because of higher transaction costs. Manager 
A is not the most appropriate choice because its use of hard-stop losses can risk 
closing positions too frequently. That, in turn, will increase turnover as well as 
trading costs. Manager C is problematic because in the case of an actively man -
aged portfolio, the portfolio turnover should agree with (not be greater than) the 
frequency of signals generated and the securities’ liquidity.
25. Transparency: SMA. Offering real-time, position-level detail to the investor, 
SMAs provide complete transparency and accurate attribution. Even if Diversi -
fied offers position-level detail, it is likely available with a delay.
Investor Behavior: Diversified. Diversified is not as susceptible to investor micro -
management. Decisions are set by the manager, and portfolio value is determined 
by the related strategy without investor modification.
Cost: Diversified. An SMA investor owns individual securities directly, which 
provides additional safety should a liquidity event occur. Although the manag -
er continues to make investment decisions, those will not be influenced by the 
redemption or liquidity demands of other investors in the strategy.
Liquidity: SMA. An SMA investor owns individual securities directly, which 
provides additional safety should a liquidity event occur. Although the manag -
er continues to make investment decisions, those will not be influenced by the 
redemption or liquidity demands of other investors in the strategy.
Tracking Risk: Diversified. Diversified would have lower tracking risk compared 
to SMAs, whose customization increases the chances of tracking risk relative to 
the benchmark. This can confuse attribution because performance will reflect 
investor constraints rather than manager decisions.
26. Detail 1. Benefit: This is a benefit if Lyon’s positions are paired with the idea 
of capturing alpha as prices converge while offsetting market risk and are 
well-matched and sized correctly.
Detail 2. Drawback: The reliance of Lyon’s strategy on unique information is a 
drawback as it is difficult for Lyon to have an informational edge in a regulatory 
environment that seeks to reduce informational symmetries.
Detail 3. Drawback: This is a drawback because in a context of significant asset 
growth, Lyon should adjust the number and/or characteristics of the positions 
held to accommodate the increase in AUM.
27. C is correct. Experienced investment personnel is a key aspect of investment due 
diligence. A strong back office and suitable investment vehicles are key aspects of 
operational due diligence.
28. A is correct. The tax advantages to separately managed accounts do not accrue 
to a tax exempt investor. Choices B and C are considerations that reflect the 
investor’s preferences and could be better satisfied using a separately managed 
account.
29. A is correct. Open-end funds provide daily liquidity; shares are bought and sold 
at the end-of-day NAV. Limited partnerships and private equity funds typically 
require investors to invest their money for longer periods.
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 138
30. A is correct. Pooled investment vehicles are typically operated at a lower cost 
than separately managed accounts because operational costs can be spread 
among multiple investors. An investor who is focused on tax efficiency would 
prefer a separately managed account because a separate account allows the 
implementation of tax-efficient investing and trading strategies, and the inves -
tor pays taxes only on capital gains realized. If the investor requires clear legal 
ownership, they would prefer a separately managed account in which the investor 
owns the individual security directly.
31. A is correct. ETFs, as listed securities that can be bought and sold intra-day, are 
the most liquid vehicles. Hedge fund liquidity features—such as redemption fre -
quency, notification period, lockup, and gates—limit the liquidity of hedge funds. 
Private equity funds return capital and make profit distributions to investors only 
as investments are sold during the life of the fund, which is often 10 years and 
may be extended.
32. Open-end funds with an incentive fee. Open-end funds with an incentive fee are 
the most appropriate among the three investment vehicles being considered by 
Circue. Although slightly less liquid than closed-end funds, open-end funds still 
offer daily liquidity—with Circue indicating some tolerance for lower liquidity. 
An incentive fee is applicable in this case as mutual fund assets are often “sticky”; 
investors are reluctant to switch allocations once made and may accept lower re -
turns. This outcome decreases manager motivation and leads to closet indexing, 
to which Circue has a heightened sensitivity among its active managers. Thus, 
the incentive fee can help motivate managers to work harder to improve perfor -
mance. Closed-end funds are the most liquid of the three choices. Without an 
accompanying incentive fee, however, the closed-end fund manager may not have 
the same motivation to work harder than the open-end fund manager, who does 
have an incentive fee. Hedge funds are inappropriate here because they are the 
least liquid of the three options. A soft lock charges a redemption fee, paid into 
the fund, which is inconsistent with Circue’s moderate sensitivity to fees.
33. Under the fee structure identified by Porter, Smith’s stated expectation would 
be reflected in a misestimation of portfolio risk because performance-based fee 
structures may lead to such misestimates. Performance-based fee structures 
convert symmetrical gross active return distributions into asymmetrical net 
active return distributions, reducing variability on the upside but not the down -
side. As a result, a single standard deviation calculated on a return series that 
incorporates active returns, above and below the base fee, can lead to the under -
estimation of downside risk. In contrast, fully symmetric fees (fully exposing the 
manager to both upside and downside results) tend to yield closer alignment in 
risk and effort than bonus-style fees.
34. Gross Active Return ≤ 0.20%: Gross Active Return at or below the Base Fee − 
Base Fee = Net Active Return: 0.20 − 0.20 = 0.00, therefore Base Fee = Billed Fee 
(No Sharing Fee)0.20
 Gross Active Return = 0.75%: Active Return − Base Fee = Return Subject to 
Sharing Fee: 0.75 − 0.20 
 = 0.55
 Return Subject to Sharing Fee × Sharing Fee = Additional Fee Due to Sharing 
Fee: 0.55 × 0.25 
 = 0.1375
 Base Fee + Additional Fee Due to Sharing Fee = Billed Fee: 0.20 + 0.1375 
 = 0.3375
Solutions 139
 Active Return − Billed Fee = Net Active Return: 0.75 − 0.3375 
 = 0.4125, rounded to 0.41%
 Gross Active Return = 1.25% is the breakeven active return (No Sharing Fee): 
Gross Active Return − Standard Fee = Net Active Return: 1.25 – 0.35 
 = 0.90 or 0.90%
 Standard Fee = Billed Fee (No Sharing Fee)0.35
 Gross Active Return = 1.75%: Gross Active Return − Base Fee = Return Subject 
to Sharing Fee: 1.75 − 0.20 
 = 1.55
 Return Subject to Sharing Fee × Sharing Fee = Additional Fee Due to Sharing 
Fee: 1.55 × 0.25 
 = 0.3875
 Base Fee + Additional Fee Due to Sharing Fee = Billed Fee: 0.2 + 0.3875 
 = 0.5875
 Gross Active Return − Billed Fee = Net Active Return: 1.75 − 0.5875 
 = 1.1625, rounded to 1.16%
35. Vaudreuil. The impact of Vaudreuil’s fees on the client is lower as assets grow 
in a rising market. This is a benefit to the client. The client might not achieve 
the same level of returns as would be available under a different fee structure. 
Vaudreuil might not want to risk losing assets once they are large and may not 
work to generate the same level of returns to retain assets because they tend to be 
“sticky. ”
Pourtir. Performance-based fees work to align the interests of Pourtir and the 
client because both parties share in the investment results.
The client benefits by paying lower fees when active returns are low.
Pourtir may work harder. Tension can be created between the client and Pourtir, 
as the client must pay base fees even if Pourtir underperforms.
Pourtir’s fee structure may lead to misestimates of portfolio risk and may incen -
tivize Pourtir to assume higher portfolio risk.
The client and Pourtir may have different incentives when performance-based 
fees are used, specifically in the case of bonus-style fees.
Performance-based fees may incentivize Pourtir to hold on to assets until a profit 
can be realized even if the client would benefit from selling the assets at a loss 
and investing the proceeds elsewhere.
36. A is correct. Because incentive fees are fees charged as a percentage of returns 
(reducing net gains in positive months and reducing net losses in negative 
months), its use lowers the standard deviation of realized returns. Charging a 
management fee (a fixed percentage based on assets) lowers the level of realized 
return without affecting the standard deviation of the return series.
37. C is correct. A symmetrical fee structure is one in which the fees are affected by 
both positive and negative performance. Of the three funds in Exhibit 1 , only Yel -
low Wood has a symmetrical structure. Yellow Wood’s profit sharing component 
will be negative if its return is negative and positive if it is positive.
38. A is correct. Red Grass’s fee arrangement allows for unlimited 
performance-based fees on the upside and no negative consequences on the 
Learning Module 2 Investment Manager Selection 140
downside.
39. B is correct. The fund’s fee schedule includes a base fee of 1.50% and a 20% 
performance-based fee. The performance-based fee is applied after the base fee is 
deducted. The total fee is calculated as follows:
 1.5% + [20% × (15% − 1.5%)] = 4.20%
40. B is correct. Red Grass Fund’s fee schedule states that the fee will be the higher of 
either (1) the base fee or (2) the base fee plus the sharing of the positive perfor -
mance. The 2017 return was negative and only the base fee should be applied.
41. B is correct. The fee schedule states that the fee will be the higher of either (1) 
the base fee or (2) the base fee plus sharing of the positive performance, with a 
maximum fee of 2.50%. Furthermore, it states that the performance-based fee 
is assessed on the active return. Without an upper limit, the fee would be 0.5% 
+ [20% × (14% − 2%)] = 2.90%, which is greater than 2.50%; so, the 2.50% fee is 
assessed.
42. C is correct. The 2016 fee calculation would not be affected by the high-water 
mark provision because it is the first year of operation of the fund and the return 
is positive (no prior losses to be offset). The investment management fee in 2016 
is calculated as follows:
 Investment management fee = 1.00% + [20% × (8.0% − 1.00%)] = 2.4%.
The 2017 fee calculation would also not be affected by the high-water mark pro -
vision because the profit-sharing component of the fee is zero as a result of a neg -
ative return in that year. The investment management fee is calculated as follows:
 Investment management fee = 1.00% + 0.00% = 1.00%.
The 2018 fee would be affected by the high-water mark provision because the 
sharing fee percentage would now be part of the 2018 gain and will need to 
offset the prior year losses, and only the remaining gains will generate a fee. 
The performance-based fee would be based on only the gains in excess of the 
high-water mark. The actual investment management fee charged (percentage 
and dollar value) will depend on the specific feature of the calculation, which 
is beyond the scope of this learning module. Note that the correct answer can 
be identified by observing that 2018 is the only year in which a positive return 
follows a negative return in the prior year.
43. Carpenter Management. Carpenter Management has a bonus-style fee with a 
maximum fee feature. Bonus-style fees are the close equivalent of a manager’s call 
option on a share of active return, for which the base fee is the strike price—for 
example, the 18 bps base fee, plus a long call option on active return with a strike 
price equal to the minimum (base) fee, minus another (less valuable call option) 
with a strike price equal to the maximum fee. Hidden Lake has a symmetrical fee 
structure in which the manager is fully exposed to both the downside and upside. 
So, of the two firms, Carpenter Management’s fee structure is most similar to a 
call option.
Overview of the Global Investment 
Performance Standards
by Philip Lawton, PhD, CFA, CIPM.
Philip Lawton, PhD, CFA, CIPM (USA)
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
discuss the objectives and scope of the GIPS standards and their 
benefits to prospective clients and investors, as well as investment 
managers
explain the fundamentals of compliance with the GIPS standards, 
including the definition of the firm and the firm’s definition of 
discretion
discuss requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to return 
calculation methodologies, including the treatment of external cash 
flows, cash and cash equivalents, and expenses and fees
explain the recommended valuation hierarchy of the GIPS standards
explain requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to 
composite return calculations, including methods for asset-weighting 
portfolio returns
explain the meaning of “discretionary” in the context of composite 
construction and, given a description of the relevant facts, determine 
whether a portfolio is likely to be considered discretionary
explain the role of investment mandates, objectives, or strategies in 
the construction of composites
explain requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to 
composite construction, including switching portfolios among 
composites, the timing of the inclusion of new portfolios in 
composites, and the timing of the exclusion of terminated portfolios 
from composites
explain requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to 
presentation and reporting
explain the conditions under which the performance of a past firm 
or affiliation may be linked to or used to represent the historical 
performance of a new or acquiring firm
discuss the purpose, scope, and process of verificationLEARNING MODULE
3
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 142
OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF THE GIPS STANDARDS
discuss the objectives and scope of the GIPS standards and their 
benefits to prospective clients and investors, as well as investment 
managers
This reading explains the rationale and application of certain provisions of the 2020 
edition of the Global Investment Performance Standards (GIPS®) for Firms. The 2020 
edition of the GIPS standards contains three chapters: the GIPS Standards for Firms, 
the GIPS Standards for Asset Owners, and the GIPS Standards for Verifiers, each with 
its own glossary. Candidates are responsible not only for the material contained 
directly in this reading but also for the sections of the GIPS Standards for Firms 
specifically referenced within this reading.  The entirety of the 2020 GIPS Standards 
for Firms can be found here:
https://  www  .cfainstitute  .org/  en/ ethics/  codes/  gips -standards/  firms
The GIPS standards fulfill an essential role in investment management around 
the world. They meet the need for globally accepted standards for investment man -
agement firms in calculating and presenting their investment returns to prospective 
clients  and prospective investors . (In the context of the GIPS Standards for Firms, 
a prospective client  is any person or entity that has expressed interest in one of the 
firm’s strategies and qualifies to invest in that strategy via a segregated account, 
irrespective of whether the person or entity currently invests with the firm through 
another strategy that the firm offers. A prospective investor  is any person or entity 
that has expressed interest in one of the firm’s pooled funds and qualifies to invest in 
the pooled fund, again irrespective of any other current investments with the firm. 
These and other terms bolded in this reading are defined in the glossary of the GIPS 
Standards for Firms. For purposes of this reading, the terms client  and investor  may 
be used interchangeably.)
The GIPS standards are based on the ideals of fair representation and full disclosure 
of an investment management firm’s performance history. Firms that claim compliance 
with the GIPS standards must adhere to rules governing not only return calculations 
but also the way in which returns are displayed in a GIPS Report . (A GIPS Report 
is a specific type of performance presentation that must be provided to prospective  
clients and investors when a firm claims compliance with the GIPS standards.) They 
are further required to make certain disclosures and are encouraged to make others in 
a GIPS Report, thereby assisting the user in interpreting and evaluating the reported 
returns. Prospective and current clients can have a high degree of confidence that the 
information shown in a GIPS Report reflects the results of the firm’s past investment 
decisions. They can also be confident that the returns are calculated and presented 
on a consistent basis and are objectively comparable for a given strategy with those 
reported by other firms claiming compliance with the GIPS standards.
Objective and Scope of the GIPS Standards
The GIPS standards evolved from earlier efforts to improve the reliability of invest -
ment performance information and to standardize calculation methodologies and 
presentation standards. In this part of the reading, we explain the objectives and 
scope of the GIPS standards.1
Objective and Scope of the GIPS Standards 143
The Need for Global Investment Performance Standards
To appreciate the value of industry-wide performance presentation standards, consider 
some of the many ways in which unscrupulous employees might attempt to gather 
and retain assets by misrepresenting a firm’s historical record. In communicating with 
a prospective client or investor, they could
 ■present returns only for the best-performing portfolios as though those 
returns fully represented the firm’s expertise in a given strategy or style;
 ■base portfolio values on their own unsubstantiated estimates of asset prices;
 ■inflate returns by annualizing partial-period results;
 ■select the most favorable measurement period, calculating returns from a 
low point to a high point;
 ■present simulated returns as though they had actually been earned;
 ■choose as a benchmark the particular index the selected portfolios have out -
performed by the greatest margin during the preferred measurement period;
 ■portray the growth of assets in the style or strategy of interest so as to mask 
the difference between investment returns and client contributions; or
 ■use the marketing department’s expertise in graphic design to underplay 
unfavorable performance data and direct the prospect’s attention to the 
most persuasive elements of the sales presentation.
Some of the foregoing examples are admittedly egregious abuses. They are not, 
however, farfetched. The investment management industry is highly competitive, 
and people whose careers and livelihoods depend on winning new business want to 
communicate their firm’s performance in the most favorable light. The GIPS stan -
dards are ethical criteria designed to ensure that the firm’s performance history is 
fairly represented and adequately disclosed. Indeed, employees who are pressured to 
misrepresent their firm’s investment results can and should cite the GIPS standards.
Without established, well-formulated, and widely adopted standards for investment 
performance measurement and presentation, the prospective client’s or investor’s 
ability to make sound decisions in selecting investment managers would be impaired. 
Individual clients, investors, and their advisors, as well as pension plan sponsors, 
foundation trustees, and other institutional investors with fiduciary responsibility for 
asset pools, need reliable information. The GIPS standards increase their confidence 
that the returns shown fairly represent an investment firm’s historical record. The 
GIPS standards also enable them to make reasonable comparisons among different 
investment management firms before hiring one of them. Evaluating past returns is 
only one dimension of the manager selection process, but it is an important one in 
fulfilling the due diligence responsibilities expected of fiduciaries.
Global standards for performance presentation, including a requirement to show a 
strategy’s returns alongside the returns of an appropriate benchmark , can lead to an 
informative discussion about the firm’s investment decision-making process. A pro -
spective client might ask, for instance, why the strategy outperformed the benchmark 
in some periods and not in others, inviting the firm’s spokespersons to explain past 
returns and to describe how the investment product is positioned for the future. The 
firm’s representatives should be able to explain the sources of past returns reasonably, 
credibly, and insightfully in light of the firm’s investment philosophy and investment 
decision-making process as well as the then-prevailing capital market environment. 
(It must be stressed in this context that reviewing properly calculated, fully 
disclosed historical results does not exempt the prospective client from a thorough 
investigation of the candidate firm’s background, resources, and capabilities for the 
mandate under consideration. Due diligence in selecting an investment manager 
includes, among many other important elements, examining a firm’s regulatory history, 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 144
the experience and professional credentials of its decision makers, the soundness of 
its investment philosophy, the nature of its investment and operational risk controls, 
and the independence of its service providers.) 
The benefits of the GIPS standards to prospective and current clients are clear. 
What, if any, are the benefits to the investment management firms incurring the 
expenses required to achieve and maintain compliance with the GIPS standards?
There is, first, an immeasurable benefit to the investment management industry 
as a whole. The development of well-founded, thoughtfully defined performance pre -
sentation standards is a great credit not only to the vision of certain professionals and 
organizations but, above all, to the leadership of the investment management firms 
that adopted the standards early on. The GIPS standards may reassure investors about 
compliant firms’ integrity in the area of investment performance reporting, especially 
if they have been verified. Verification , discussed later in this reading, refers to an 
investment firm’s voluntarily engaging an independent third party to test the firm’s 
design and implementation of certain performance measurement policies and pro -
cedures. Verification brings additional credibility to the firm’s claim of compliance 
with the GIPS standards.
The practical benefits to individual firms facing the initial and ongoing expenses of 
GIPS compliance have increased over time. In some markets, the GIPS standards are 
so well accepted by plan sponsors and consultants that non-compliance is a serious 
competitive impediment to a firm’s winning new institutional business. Requests for 
proposals (RFPs) in manager searches routinely ask if the responding firm is in com -
pliance with the GIPS standards and if the firm has been independently verified. In 
addition, the global recognition the GIPS standards have gained helps the compliant 
firm to compete in international markets because prospective clients and investors 
value the ability to equitably compare its investment performance to that of local 
GIPS-compliant firms. Compliance with the GIPS standards has appropriately been 
characterized as the investment management firm’s passport to the international 
marketplace.
Because the GIPS standards reflect best practices in the calculation and presen -
tation of investment performance, firms may also realize internal benefits. In the 
course of implementing the GIPS standards, they might identify opportunities to 
strengthen managerial controls. The discipline of reviewing portfolio guidelines and 
defining, documenting, and adhering to internal policies in support of compliance 
with the GIPS standards typically improves the firm’s oversight of investment opera -
tions and provides management with additional comfort in the accuracy of the firm’s 
performance reporting and the quality of the presentations provided to prospective 
clients and investors. Similarly, technological enhancements designed to provide valid 
calculation input data and presentation elements, such as dispersion statistics, may 
improve the quality of information available to the firm.
The Scope of the GIPS Standards for Firms
Only investment management firms and asset owners that manage assets on a dis -
cretionary basis—and compete for business—may claim compliance with the GIPS 
Standards for Firms. (An asset owner that manages investments, directly and/or 
through the use of external managers, on behalf of participants, beneficiaries, or the 
organization itself—but does not compete for business—would comply with the GIPS 
Standards for Asset Owners.) Consultants, software houses, or third-party performance 
measurement providers such as custodians may not claim to be GIPS-compliant. 
GIPS compliance cannot be claimed for only some of an investment firm’s prod -
ucts, nor for specific composites, pooled funds,  or portfolios ; compliance can be 
achieved only on a firm-wide basis. A firm’s claim of compliance signifies, among 
other things, that the firm’s performance measurement data inputs, processes, and 
return calculation methodology conform to the prescribed guidelines; that all of the 
Objective and Scope of the GIPS Standards 145
firm’s fee-paying discretionary segregated accounts  have been assigned to at least 
one composite; and that all limited distribution pooled funds  meeting a composite 
definition  are properly included in the appropriate composites.
UNDERSTANDING KEY TERMS
Here we pause for a brief detour to define a few terms that have very specific 
meaning in the context of the GIPS standards:
Composite.  A composite is an aggregation of one or more portfolios that 
are managed according to a similar investment mandate, objective, or 
strategy. 
Segregated Account.  A segregated account is a portfolio owned by a single 
client, sometimes referred to in practice as a separately managed account 
(SMA).
Pooled Fund.  A pooled fund is also a “portfolio, ” but we distinguish 
between a segregated account portfolio and a pooled fund portfolio in 
this reading because the requirements of the GIPS standards for pooled 
funds may differ from those that apply to segregated accounts. Pooled 
funds are further distinguished between limited distribution and broad 
distribution pooled funds. A broad distribution pooled fund is a pooled 
fund that is regulated under a framework that would permit the general 
public to purchase or hold the pooled fund’s shares and is not exclusively 
offered in one-on-one presentations. Mutual fund and UCITs are exam -
ples of broad distribution pooled funds. A limited distribution pooled 
fund is any pooled fund that is not a broad distribution pooled fund. 
Examples of limited distribution pooled funds include many private 
equity or hedge funds. 
This reading is based on the 2020 edition of the GIPS standards, which are effective 
as of 1 January 2020. GIPS Reports  that include performance for periods ending on 
or after 31 December 2020 must be prepared in accordance with the 2020 edition of 
the GIPS standards.
Overview of the GIPS Standards
The Introduction to the GIPS standards articulates the mission and objectives of the 
GIPS standards and provides an overview of key concepts important to understanding 
the objectives and scope of the GIPS standards.
The mission of the GIPS standards is “to promote ethics and integrity and instill 
trust through the use of the GIPS standards by achieving universal demand for com -
pliance by asset owners, adoption by asset managers, and support from regulators 
for the ultimate benefit of the global investment community. ”
The five objectives of the GIPS standards are to: 
 ■promote investor interests and instill investor confidence;
 ■ensure accurate and consistent data;
 ■obtain worldwide acceptance of a single standard for calculating and pre -
senting performance;
 ■promote fair, global competition among investment firms; and
 ■promote industry self-regulation on a global basis.
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 146
Key concepts of the GIPS Standards for Firms include the following:
 ■Fair representation and full disclosure of investment performance is the key 
principle underlying the GIPS standards . As ethical standards, the GIPS 
standards are voluntary.
 ■Fair representation and full disclosure likely requires adherence to both the 
minimum requirements and the recommendations of the GIPS standards . 
When appropriate, firms have the responsibility to include information in 
the GIPS Reports that is not specifically addressed by the GIPS standards.
 ■Firms must comply with all applicable requirements of the GIPS stan -
dards, including any Guidance Statements, interpretations, and Questions 
& Answers (Q&As) published by CFA Institute and the GIPS standards 
governing bodies . The GIPS standards consist of requirements which must 
be followed in order for a firm to claim compliance. The GIPS standards 
also include recommendations, which are optional but should be followed 
because they represent best practice in performance presentation.
 ■The GIPS standards do not address every aspect of performance measure -
ment and will continue to evolve over time to address additional areas of 
investment performance . The GIPS standards will continue to evolve as the 
industry tackles additional areas of performance measurement and rec -
ognizes the implications of new investment strategies, instruments, and 
technologies.
 ■Composites are required for all strategies managed on behalf of or marketed 
to segregated account clients to prevent firms from cherry-picking the per -
formance presented to prospective clients.  To promote fair representations 
of performance, the GIPS standards require firms to include all actual 
fee-paying, discretionary segregated accounts in at least one composite. 
Composites are defined by investment mandate, objective, or strategy. 
Pooled funds must also be included in any composite if the pooled fund 
meets the composite definition.
 ■The GIPS standards rely on the integrity of input data, including the valua -
tions of portfolio holdings and the use of certain calculation methodologies.  
Because the GIPS standards are global, prospective clients  and prospective 
investors  engaged in an evaluation of competing GIPS-compliant firms’ 
historical performance know that rates of return have been calculated in 
accordance with a common set of valuation principles and methodological 
guidelines.
The GIPS standards require that firms must meet all the applicable requirements 
set forth in the GIPS standards. There can be no exceptions. As stated in the part of 
the Introduction headed “Claiming Compliance and Verification, ” firms must take all 
steps necessary to ensure that they have satisfied all of the applicable requirements 
before claiming compliance with the GIPS standards. Moreover, firms are strongly 
encouraged to perform periodic internal compliance checks to confirm the validity of 
compliance claims. Implementing adequate internal controls during all stages of the 
investment performance process will instill confidence in the performance presented 
and in the claim of compliance. The GIPS standards recommend that firms be verified.
When the GIPS standards conflict with laws and/or regulations regarding the 
calculation and presentation of performance, the GIPS standards obligate firms to 
comply with laws and regulations and to disclose the conflict in the GIPS Report. 
Firms are strongly encouraged to comply with the GIPS standards in addition to 
applicable regulatory requirements.
In the next sections, we discuss specific requirement of the GIPS standards. The 
GIPS Standards for Firms are divided into eight sections:
Objective and Scope of the GIPS Standards 147
1. Fundamentals of Compliance 
2. Input Data and Calculation Methodology
3. Composite and Pooled Fund Maintenance
4. Composite Time-Weighted Return Report
5. Composite Money-Weighted Return Report
6. Pooled Fund Time-Weighted Return Report
7. Pooled Fund Money-Weighted Return Report
8. GIPS Advertising Guidelines
Sections 4, 5, 6, and 7 detail the requirements and recommendations for the vari -
ous report types specified by the GIPS standards: Composite Time-Weighted Return 
Reports, Composite Money-Weighted Return Reports, Pooled Fund Time-Weighted 
Return Reports, and Pooled Fund Money-Weighted Return Reports. Section 8 focuses 
on the GIPS Advertising Guidelines, outlining the conditions under which a firm that 
claims compliance with the GIPS standards can include such a claim in its advertis -
ing. The balance of this reading focuses primarily on the remaining sections of the 
GIPS standards: (1) Fundamentals of Compliance, (2) Input Data and Calculation 
Methodology, and (3) Composite and Pooled Fund Maintenance.
Exhibit 1  contains an excerpt from the GIPS standards introducing each of these 
topics.
Exhibit 1: Content of the Global Investment Performance Standards
1. Fundamentals of Compliance:  Several core principles create the 
foundation for the GIPS standards, including properly defining the 
firm, providing GIPS Reports to all prospective clients and prospective 
pooled fund investors, adhering to applicable laws and regulations, 
and ensuring that information presented is not false or misleading. 
Two important issues that a firm must consider when becoming com -
pliant with the GIPS standards are the definition of the firm and the 
firm’s definition of discretion. The definition of the firm is the founda -
tion for firm-wide compliance and creates defined boundaries whereby 
total firm assets can be determined. The firm’s definition of discretion 
establishes criteria to judge which portfolios must be included in a 
composite and is based on the firm’s ability to implement its invest -
ment strategies. 
2. Input Data and Calculation Methodology:  Consistency of input data 
used to calculate performance is critical to effective compliance with 
the GIPS standards and establishes the foundation for full, fair, and 
comparable investment performance presentations. Achieving com -
parability among investment management firms’ performance presen -
tations requires uniformity in methods used to calculate returns. The 
GIPS standards mandate the use of certain calculation methodologies 
to facilitate comparability.
3. Composite and Pooled Fund Maintenance:  A composite is an 
aggregation of one or more portfolios managed according to a similar 
investment mandate, objective, or strategy. The composite return is 
the asset-weighted average of the performance of all portfolios in the 
composite. Creating meaningful composites is essential to the fair 
presentation, consistency, and comparability of performance over time 
and among firms. A composite must include all portfolios that meet 
the composite definition.
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 148
In the next seventeen sections, we discuss select required provisions of Fundamentals 
of Compliance, Input Data and Calculation Methodology, and Composite and Pooled 
Fund Maintenance.
FUNDAMENTALS OF COMPLIANCE
explain the fundamentals of compliance with the GIPS standards, 
including the definition of the firm and the firm’s definition of 
discretion
Section 1 of the GIPS Standards for Firms, “Fundamentals of Compliance, ” contains 
39 requirements and seven recommendations. For our purposes, we focus on selected 
required  fundamentals of compliance, emphasizing the definition of the firm. 
Candidates should read all of Section 1.A of the GIPS Standards for Firms for 
a complete understanding of the required fundamentals of compliance.
Although the concept of discretion, specifically the firm’s definition of discretion, 
is not technically a part of the Fundamentals of Compliance, the concept is integral 
to developing an understanding of the applications of the GIPS standards and thus is 
covered prior to delving more deeply into the standards themselves. 
Definition of the Firm 
The firm  must be defined as an investment firm, subsidiary, or division held out to the 
public as a distinct business entity . The Glossary defines a distinct business entity 
as a “unit, division, department, or office that is organizationally and functionally 
segregated from other units, divisions, departments, or offices and that retains discre -
tion over the assets it manages and that should have autonomy over the investment 
decision-making process. ” Possible criteria for identifying a distinct business entity 
are the organization being a legal entity, having a distinct market or client type, or 
using a separate and distinct investment process.
The way in which the investment management organization is held out to the 
public is a key factor in defining the firm. For example, if a unit of a larger company 
specializes in providing investment management services to private clients, and it 
is marketed as a specialist in meeting the investment needs of high-net-worth indi -
viduals and family offices, then that organizational unit might qualify as a “firm” for 
the purpose of compliance with the GIPS standards. Certainly, however, the unit’s 
entitlement to be considered a firm under the GIPS standards could be justified if it 
additionally were incorporated as a subsidiary and had its own dedicated financial 
analysts, portfolio managers, and traders located in a separate building or area of the 
company and reporting through a separate chain of command to the parent organi -
zation’s senior management.
IMPLEMENTATION
Defining the Firm 
For small investment management boutiques, defining the firm may be a rela -
tively easy task, but it can prove challenging for large firms.2
Fundamentals of Compliance 149
Consider the case of a super-regional bank whose wealth management 
department consists of two separate and distinct divisions: the private client 
division and the institutional client division. The private client division, called 
Eastern National Bank Wealth Management Services, offers investment manage -
ment to private individuals and families. The institutional client division, called 
Eastern Institutional Asset Advisors, serves tax-exempt non-profit organizations 
including pension funds and charitable foundations; it does not solicit or handle 
non-institutional business. Each division has its own investment management 
team, traders, marketing department, administrative personnel, and account -
ing department. After a few years of operating in this manner, the institutional 
investment unit decides to achieve compliance with the GIPS standards, but 
the private client division makes a business decision not to implement the GIPS 
standards. The institutional client division may nonetheless be in position to 
become GIPS-compliant because it holds itself out to customers as a distinct 
business unit, with its own autonomous investment management, research, 
trading, and administrative team.
Based on the information provided, the institutional client division appears 
to satisfy the conditions for defining itself as a firm for the purpose of compli -
ance with the GIPS standards. Sample language might be, “The firm is defined 
as Eastern Institutional Asset Advisors, the institutional asset management 
division of Eastern National Bank. ”
On the other hand, if both divisions were to use the same investment pro -
cess, approved security list, style models, and so on, and they merely divided 
assets between personal and institutional portfolios, then neither division alone 
could compellingly claim compliance. If the senior investment personnel of the 
Private Client division had authority to dictate the Institutional Client division’s 
investment strategy or tactical asset allocations, or to mandate the investment 
of institutional clients’ funds in specific securities, then the Institutional Client 
division would likely not qualify as a distinct business unit having autonomy over 
the investment decision-making process and discretion over the assets it man -
ages. If the two divisions were organizationally segregated but shared the same 
trading desk, the Institutional Client division would have to determine whether 
its decision-making autonomy is compromised by the trading arrangement. If the 
traders merely fill the portfolio manager’s orders, then the Institutional Client 
division arguably remains autonomous, but if the traders actively participate in 
the identification of misvalued securities, a greater impediment to the autonomy 
argument would exist.
Defining the firm in such a situation calls for the scrupulous exercise of 
professional judgment, with due attention to the ethical objectives of the Global 
Investment Performance Standards.
In view of the complexity of modern organizational structures, it may require 
judgment to determine if a given unit properly meets the definition of a firm. The 
decision has immediate and lasting practical consequences, however. Because the 
GIPS standards apply firm-wide, the definition of the firm will determine the extent 
of the initial implementation and ongoing compliance activities. It also establishes 
the boundaries for determining total firm assets. The phrase total firm assets  refers 
to the aggregate fair value  of all assets (whether or not discretionary or fee-paying) 
for which a firm has investment management responsibility. Total firm assets include 
assets managed by sub-advisors that the firm has authority to select but do not include 
advisory-only assets  or uncalled committed capital .
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 150
A firm that has been defined for the purposes of the GIPS standards may very 
well undergo subsequent changes in its corporate structure or organizational design. 
Changes in a firm’s organization are not permitted to lead to alteration of historical 
performance, however. Indeed, we may put it down as a general rule that, apart from 
correcting errors, historical performance is not to be altered. 
Definition of Discretion
The GIPS Standards for Firms require that all discretionary, fee-paying segregated 
accounts must be included in at least one composite. Discretionary, fee-paying pooled 
funds must also be included in at least one composite if they meet a composite defini -
tion. A key term in this requirement is “discretionary, ” although the GIPS standards do 
not define the term itself. Generally speaking, a portfolio is discretionary if the manager 
is able to implement the intended investment strategy. For example, the manager of a 
discretionary domestic mid-cap value portfolio is free to purchase any stock issued in 
the investor’s home country that meets the pertinent market capitalization and style 
criteria. The firm might define mid-cap stocks as those whose market capitalization 
falls within a certain range. Similarly, the firm might define value stocks in terms of 
their price-to-earnings multiple, price-to-book ratio, dividend yield, or other charac -
teristics intended to distinguish them from growth stocks. In line with best practice, 
the firm and the client will agree in advance that the portfolio’s investment objective 
is to outperform a specified benchmark that is an appropriate measure of success 
in the domestic mid-cap market. For instance, the firm might construct a custom 
benchmark that is acceptable to the client, or the firm and the client might agree to 
use a commercially available index that mirrors the domestic mid-cap market.
Although both discretionary and non-discretionary portfolios are included in 
total firm assets, only discretionary portfolios are included in composites. If the client 
imposes restrictions on the manager’s freedom to make investment decisions to buy, 
hold, and sell securities so as to carry out the investment strategy and achieve the 
portfolio’s financial objectives, then the manager must consider whether the portfolio 
is in fact discretionary. In general, restrictions that impede the investment process to 
such an extent that the strategy cannot be implemented as intended may be presumed 
to render the portfolio non-discretionary, and it should not be included in a composite.
Other Fundamentals of Compliance 
Other requirements under Section 1, Fundamentals of Compliance, can be broadly 
characterized as relating to:
 ■the minimum number of years required in order to initially claim compli -
ance with the GIPS standards; 
 ■documenting policies and procedures related to compliance; 
 ■complying with laws and regulations;
 ■avoiding false or misleading performance and performance-related 
information;
 ■the requirements concerning the distribution of GIPS Reports and lists of 
firm composites and pooled funds;
 ■the use of total return benchmarks reflective of the investment strategy;
 ■the requirement to correct material errors  in a GIPS Report and the redis -
tribution of the report to the appropriate parties;
 ■the maintenance of data and information necessary to support the elements 
of the GIPS Reports; and
Time-Weighted Return 151
 ■conditions under which performance may be used or linked to that of 
another firm.
TIME-WEIGHTED RETURN
discuss requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to return 
calculation methodologies, including the treatment of external cash 
flows, cash and cash equivalents, and expenses and fees
Section 2.A of the GIPS Standards for Firms addresses, among other aspects, the 
requirements for calculating portfolio and composite returns. The GIPS standards 
mandate the use of a time-weighted return  (TWR). Money-weighted returns  
(MWRs) may be used for portfolios meeting certain conditions (described later). In 
the following paragraphs, we address TWR, MWR, and the treatment of cash balances 
and fees and expenses. 
Candidates should read Section 2.A, Provisions 2.A.1 through 2.A.39 of the 
GIPS Standards for Firms. Candidates are not responsible for the provisions in 
Section 2 related to Private Market Investments, Real Estate, Carve-Outs, Wrap 
Fees, and Side Pockets and Subscription Lines of Credit (Provisions 2.A.40 
through 2.A.50).
Time-Weighted Return 
TWR is a method of calculating period-by-period returns that reflects the change in 
value and negates the effects of external cash flows . Except for private market invest -
ment portfolios, portfolios using TWR must be valued monthly, and the TWR must 
be calculated at least monthly as of the calendar month end or last business day of the 
month. If returns are not calculated daily and the portfolio receives an intra-month 
large cash flow , the portfolio must be valued and a sub-period return must be calcu -
lated at the time of the large cash flow. Private market investment portfolios (e.g., real 
estate and infrastructure, private equity, and similar investments that are illiquid, not 
publicly traded, and not traded on an exchange) must be valued quarterly.
What constitutes a large cash flow is defined by the firm. It is usually an external 
cash flow of such size that it may distort the return if the portfolio is not valued and 
a sub-period return is not calculated at the time of the cash flow. A large cash flow 
may be defined either relative to an absolute monetary threshold or as a percentage 
of the portfolio or composite assets. 
If the portfolio is a pooled fund (a fund whose ownership interests may be held 
by more than one investor), and the pooled fund is not included in one of the firm’s 
composites, the fund must be valued and returns must be calculated at least annually. 
Similar to the composite requirements presented above, the pooled fund must be valued 
at the time of any subscriptions or redemptions and a sub-period return calculated 
as of that date. The sub-period return is then linked with other sub-period returns.
In the simplest case, when no external cash flows (i.e., client-initiated additions to 
or withdrawals from invested assets) occur during the period, calculating the TWR 
is straightforward:
   r  t   =    V  1   −  V  0   _  V  0      (1)3
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 152
where rt is the TWR for period t; V1 is the ending value of the portfolio, including 
cash and accrued income, at the end of the period; and V0 is the portfolio’s beginning 
value, including cash and accrued income, at the beginning of the specified period. 
Equation 1  assumes that there are no cash inflows or cash outflows and expresses 
return as the ratio of the change in value during the period to the value at the start of 
the period. Despite its simplicity, the TWR equation produces an accurate represen -
tation of investment results in a single period with no external cash flows. As we will 
see, this equation is also used to calculate sub-period results under the intra-period 
valuation method when external cash flows occur.
Most portfolios, of course, do have external cash flows. A segregated account for an 
institutional investor, for example, may routinely have contributions and withdrawals 
based on the institution’s needs. The TWR methodology removes the effect of such 
contributions and withdrawals from the return calculation, allowing the performance 
evaluator to focus on the value added by investment decisions that are controlled by 
the investment management firm. 
If the portfolio experiences a cash flow that is not a large cash flow, the GIPS 
Standards for Firms do not require that the portfolio be valued as of the date of the 
cash flow. Instead, firms must use a method that adjusts for daily weighted cash flows, 
which is an approximation of a true TWR. 
The most accurate way to calculate a total return while eliminating the impact of 
external cash flows is to value the portfolio whenever an external cash flow occurs, 
compute a sub-period return, and geometrically link sub-period returns expressed 
in relative form according to Equation 2:
 rtwr = (1 + rt,1) × (1 + rt,2) × ... × (1 + rt,n) − 1   (2)
where rtwr is the time-weighted total return for the entire period and rt,1 through 
rt,n are the sub-period returns. The GIPS standards require that the periodic returns 
be geometrically linked.
For example, consider a portfolio with a beginning value of $100,000 as of 31 May, 
a value of $109,000 on 5 June (which includes a cash contribution of $10,000 received 
that day), and an ending value of $110,550 on 30 June. Consider that the first sub-period 
ends and the second sub-period begins on the cash flow date, such that the ending 
value for Sub-period 1 is $99,000 ($109,000 less the contribution of $10,000) and the 
beginning value for Sub-period 2, including the $10,000 contribution, is $109,000. 
The portfolio’s true time-weighted return using the intra-period valuation method is 
0.41%, computed as follows:
   r  t,1   =    V  1   −  V  0   _  V  0     =      (  109, 000 − 10, 000 )     − 100, 000   ______________________   100, 000   =   99, 000 − 100, 000  _____________  100, 000   = − 0.01 
   r  t,2   =    V  2   −  V  1   _  V  1     =   110, 550 − 109, 000  ______________  109, 000   = 0.0142  
    r  twr   =    (  1 +  r  t       ,1   )     ×    (  1 +  r  t       ,2   )     − 1 =    [  1 +    (  − 0.01 )     ]     ×    (  1 + 0.0142  )     − 1        
= 1.0041  − 1 = 0.0041  = 0.41%   
Geometric linking is used because returns are compounded and so are not additive 
but multiplicative.
If the portfolio experiences cash flows that are not large cash flows, and the firm 
does not calculate daily performance, portfolio returns must be calculated using a 
method that adjusts for daily weighted cash flows. Examples of acceptable approaches 
are the Modified Dietz method and the Modified Internal Rate of Return (Modified 
IRR) method, both of which weight each cash flow by the proportion of the measure -
ment period it is held in the portfolio.
Equation 3 shows the formula for estimating the time-weighted rate of return 
using the Modified Dietz method:
Time-Weighted Return 153
   r  ModDietz   =    V  1   −  V  0   − CF  ______________   
 V  0   +  ∑ 
i=1  n
   (  C  F  i   ×  w  i   )       (3)
where   ∑ 
i=1  n
   (  C  F  i   ×  w  i   )     is the sum of each cash flow multiplied by its weight and  
CF = ∑ C  F  i   . The weight ( wi) is simply the proportion of the measurement period, in 
days, that each cash flow has been in the portfolio, as shown in Equation 4:
   w  i   =   CD −  D  i   _ CD    (4)
where CD is the total number of calendar days in the period and Di is the number 
of calendar days from the beginning of the period to the time cash flow CFi occurs. 
(Note that this formula assumes that cash flows occur at the end of the day.1) In our 
example, a $10,000 contribution occurs on 5 June, so Di = 5, and there are 30 days in 
June, so CD = 30. The proportion of the measurement period for which the $10,000 
is in the portfolio is thus
   w  i   =   CD −  D  i   _ CD   =   30 − 5 _ 30   =   25 _ 30   = 0.83 
Applying the Modified Dietz formula to the same example gives a return of 0.51%:
   r  ModDietz   =    V  1   −  V  0   − CF  ______________   
 V  0   +  ∑ 
i=1  n
   (  C  F  i   ×  w  i   )      =   110, 550 − 100, 000 − 10, 000   _______________________    100, 000 +    [  10, 000 ×    (  25 / 30 )     ]       = 0.0051  = 0.51% 
Note that this formula as given assumes that the portfolio is not valued at the time 
of the external cash flow.
The Modified IRR method is another estimation approach. This method deter -
mines the internal rate of return (IRR) for the period, adjusted to take into account 
the timing of cash flows. The Modified IRR is the value of r that satisfies Equation 5:
 Ending Value = V1 =   ∑ 
i=1  n
   [  C  F  i   ×   (  1 + r )      w  i    ]    +  V  0     (  1 + r )      (5)
where the exponent, wi, is as previously defined the ratio of the amount of time 
CFi is in the portfolio to the total time in the measurement period. The equation is 
solved iteratively by a trial-and-error procedure, settling on the value of r that makes 
the series of cash flows equal to the ending fair value. The Modified IRR method is 
computationally intensive, but programs are available for solving the equation efficiently. 
(Some Modified IRR programs use the Modified Dietz return as an initial estimate or 
seed value.) Applying the Modified IRR method to the simple example used earlier 
in this section gives a result of 0.51%, the same as the rate of return found with the 
Modified Dietz method.
TRUE VS. ESTIMATED TIME-WEIGHTED RETURNS
In the foregoing section, different methodologies for calculating a rate of return 
from a single set of input data gave different answers. To recapitulate:
Inputs:
Fair value on 31 May: $100,000
Cash flow on 5 June: + $10,000
1 Cash flows can also be assumed to occur at the beginning of the day. In that case, the weight factor is 
adjusted to add another day to the period that the cash flow is in the portfolio: wi = (CD − Di + 1)/ CD. It is 
incumbent upon the firm to establish and consistently apply a policy, for each composite or pooled fund, 
related to the weighting of cash flows.
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 154
Fair value on 5 June: $109,000 (after the cash flow)
Fair value on 30 June: $110,550
Solutions:
True time-weighted return: 0.41%
Modified Dietz method: 0.51%
Modified IRR method: 0.51%
In this particular example, the external cash flow causes the day-weighted esti -
mates (0.51%) to vary by 10 basis points from the true time-weighted return 
(0.41%).
To appreciate the potentially distorting effect of external cash flows on esti -
mated time-weighted rates of return, consider Exhibit 2  through Exhibit 4 . The 
exhibits depict a “market index” with a value of 100 as of 31 May, and the data 
following each exhibit represent portfolios with a value of $100,000 on 31 May 
and contributions of $10,000 received on 5 June (on the left-hand side) and 15 
June (on the right-hand side). In flat and steadily rising or falling markets (illus -
trated in Exhibit 2  and Exhibit 3 ), the timing of the cash flows has a relatively 
modest effect on the estimates’ accuracy. We can observe this phenomenon 
by comparing the true time-weighted returns with those calculated using the 
Modified Dietz method. When markets are volatile, however, as illustrated in 
Exhibit 4 , large external cash flows may have a material effect on the estimated 
return’s accuracy. The reader should work through these examples using the 
formulas for the true time-weighted return and the Modified Dietz method. 
The calculations for the first example, on the left-hand side of Exhibit 2 , were 
shown earlier.
 
Exhibit 2: Effect of Cash Flows in a Flat Market
 
115
110
105
100
95
90
85Market Index
31 May = 100
Returns
31-May Fair  Value
5-Jun Fair  Value
Contribution
Total Fair  Value
30-Jun Fair  Value
Modified Dietz–1.00%
1.42%
0.41%$ 100,000
$   99,000
$   10,000
$ 109,000
$ 110,550
0.51%Returns
31-May Fair  Value
15-Jun Fair  Value
Contribution
Total Fair  Value
30-Jun Fair  Value
Modified Dietz–0.93%
1.35%
0.41%$ 100,000
$   99,075
$   10,000
$ 109,075
$ 110,550
0.52%
Source:  Paula Gehr
Time-Weighted Return 155
 
Exhibit 3: Effect of Cash Flows in a Steadily Rising Market
 
110
108
106
102104
100
98
96
94Market Index
31 May = 100
Returns
2.00%
5.88%
8.00%31-May Fair  Value
5-Jun Fair  Value
30-Jun Fair  ValueContribution
Total Fair  Value
Modified Dietz$ 100,000
$ 102,000
$   10,000
$ 112,000
$ 118,588
7.93%Returns
4.00%
3.85%
8.00%31-May Fair  Value
15-Jun Fair  Value
30-Jun Fair  ValueContribution
Total Fair  Value
Modified Dietz$ 100,000
$ 104,000
$   10,000
$ 114,000
$ 118,385
7.99%
Source:  Paula Gehr
 
Exhibit 4: Effect of Cash Flows in a Volatile Market
 
110
105
100
95
90
85
80Market Index
31 May = 100
Returns
–5.00%
13.68%
8.00%31-May Fair  Value
5-Jun Fair  Value
30-Jun Fair  ValueContribution
Total Fair  Value
Modified Dietz$ 100,000
$   95,000
$   10,000
$ 105,000
$ 119,364
8.64%Returns
–10.00%
20.00%
8.00%31-May Fair  Value
15-Jun Fair  Value
30-Jun Fair  ValueContribution
Total Fair  Value
Modified Dietz$ 100,000
$   90,000
$   10,000
$ 100,000
$ 120,000
9.52%
Source:  Paula Gehr
The GIPS standards require firms to formulate and document composite-specific 
and pooled fund–specific policies for the treatment of external cash flows and to 
adhere to those policies consistently. Each policy should describe the firm’s meth -
odology for computing time-weighted returns and the firm’s assumptions about the 
timing of capital inflows and outflows. If it is the firm’s rule to value portfolios on 
the date of all external cash flows, as the GIPS standards recommend, then the firm 
should also state that policy.
As we have previously remarked, the GIPS standards do not specify a quantitative 
definition of large external cash flows. Taking into account the liquidity of the market 
segments or asset classes and the nature of the investment strategy, firms must make 
their own determinations for each composite. For example, a relatively high percentage 
of portfolio value might be easily deployed in a developed equity market, whereas a 
lower percentage of portfolio value might be deemed the appropriate criterion for a 
large external cash flow in a comparatively illiquid emerging debt market.
Whatever definition a firm adopts, it must document the policy and follow it 
without exception. If a portfolio receives a large external cash flow, as defined for 
the composite in which the portfolio is included, the firm is not at liberty to omit 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 156
the valuation on the grounds that the market was not especially volatile during the 
measurement period. Inconsistent applications of firm policies constitute a breach 
of the GIPS standards.
IMPLEMENTATION
Return Calculation Policies 
Firms must calculate time-weighted rates of return that adjust for external 
cash flows. Both periodic and sub-period returns must be geometrically linked. 
External cash flows must be treated according to the firm’s composite-specific 
policy. These portfolios must be valued on the date of all large cash flows, and 
firms must define what constitutes a large cash flow for each composite in order 
to determine when the portfolios in that composite must be valued. Here are 
examples of internal policy statements addressing these elements:
Portfolio return calculation methodology: “Eastern Institutional Asset 
Advisors calculates each portfolio’s time-weighted rate of return on a monthly 
basis. For periods beginning on or after 1 January 2010, portfolios are valued 
monthly and when large cash flows occur. In the event of a large cash flow, 
a sub-period return will be calculated using the Modified Dietz method and 
sub-period returns will be geometrically linked to calculate the monthly return. 
Returns for longer measurement periods are computed by geometrically linking 
the monthly returns. ”
Large external cash flows: “Eastern Institutional Asset Advisors revalues 
portfolios that belong to the Large-Cap Domestic Equity composite when capital 
equal to 10% or more of fair value as of the end of the most recent measurement 
period is contributed or withdrawn. ”
MISCELLANEOUS RETURN CALCULATION TOPICS
discuss requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to return 
calculation methodologies, including the treatment of external cash 
flows, cash and cash equivalents, and expenses and fees
explain the recommended valuation hierarchy of the GIPS standards
A firm may choose to present MWRs instead of TWRs if the firm has control over 
the external cash flows and: (1) the portfolios are closed-end , fixed life , or fixed 
commitment  or (2) illiquid investments  are a significant part of the investment 
strategy. Annualized, since-inception MWRs must be calculated at least annually. For 
periods beginning with the effective date of the 2020 GIPS Standards, daily external 
cash flows must be used. (External cash flows for periods prior to this date must be 
reflected on at least a quarterly basis.) Portfolios for which a money-weighted return 
is calculated must be valued at least annually and as of the period end for which 
performance is calculated.4
Miscellaneous Return Calculation Topics 157
Annualizing Returns
Returns for periods of less than one year must not be annualized. Extrapolating 
partial-year returns by annualizing them would amount to a prediction about invest -
ment results for the rest of the year.
Treatment of Cash Equivalents
Returns from cash and cash equivalents held in portfolios must be included in all total 
return calculations. A primary purpose of performance measurement is to enable 
prospective clients and, by extension, their consultants to evaluate an investment 
management firm’s results. Within the constraints established by a client’s investment 
policy statement (IPS), active managers often have discretion to decide what portion 
of a portfolio’s assets to hold in cash or cash equivalents. The portfolio return will be 
affected by how much cash the manager elects to hold, and thus return calculations 
must reflect the contribution of the cash and cash equivalents to investment results. 
Even if the management of cash balances is handled by another firm (as is often 
the case in manager-of-manager arrangements), cash and cash equivalents must be 
included in the total return calculation.
Consider the case of an institutional investor such as a defined benefit pension plan 
sponsor. The structure of the sponsor’s investment program is generally based on an 
asset/liability study identifying the optimal mix of asset classes to meet the pension 
fund’s financial objectives at an acceptable level of risk. The sponsor retains investment 
management firms to invest the fund’s assets in specific markets in accordance with the 
study results. For example, within the domestic equity allocation, the sponsor might 
hire one firm to invest a certain portion of the fund’s assets in small-cap growth stocks 
and another firm to invest a portion in large-cap value stocks. The sponsor expects 
the managers to remain fully invested in their mandated market sectors at all times. 
The sponsor’s IPS may, however, allow the managers to hold some amount (e.g., up 
to 5% of portfolio assets) in cash and cash equivalents, if only to accommodate the 
frictional cash that arises in the process of buying and selling securities. (The client 
will usually define “cash equivalents, ” for example, as money market instruments and 
fixed-income securities with less than one year to maturity.) In this case, the manager 
has discretion over the size of the cash position, up to 5% of assets. 
Treatment of Expenses and Fees
The GIPS standards require that returns be calculated after the deduction of trans -
action costs  incurred during the period. Transaction costs are the costs of buying or 
selling investments. These costs typically take the form of brokerage commissions, 
exchange fees and/or taxes, or spreads from either internal or external brokers. For 
private market investments, transaction costs include all legal, financial, advisory, 
and investment banking fees related to buying, selling, restructuring, and/or recapi -
talizing investments but do not include costs associated with investments that were 
considered but did not ultimately make it into the fund. Custody fees  should not be 
considered transaction costs, even when they are charged on a per-transaction basis. 
Commissions are explicit costs, generally a negotiated amount per share of com -
mon stock bought or sold, intended to compensate the broker, as the investor’s agent, 
for arranging and settling trades. Bid–offer spreads are the difference between the 
price at which a dealer, acting for his firm’s account, is willing to buy a security from 
a seller and the price at which he is willing to sell the security to a buyer. From the 
investor’s perspective, the spread is the cost of immediacy or liquidity, and it com -
pensates the dealer for both the cost of operations and the risk of adverse selection 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 158
(the possibility that a well-informed trader has better information than the dealer has 
about the fundamental value of a security in the dealer’s inventory). Transaction costs 
can be estimated for a specific portfolio only if actual transaction costs are not known. 
Some portfolios may pay bundled fees , which can include any combination of 
investment management fees , transaction costs, custody fees, and/or administrative 
fees. All-in fee  arrangements are common when a single company offers diverse ser -
vices such as asset management, brokerage, and custody. If transaction costs cannot 
be identified (either actual transactions costs or estimated transactions costs based 
on a reasonable estimation method) and segregated from a bundle fee, composites for 
institutional investors must reduce the gross-of-fees  return by the entire amount of the 
bundled fee or by that portion of the bundled fee that includes the transaction costs.
Valuation Requirements
Meaningful performance measurement presupposes the validity of beginning and 
ending asset values. Section 2 of the GIPS Standards for Firms also addresses asset 
valuation. Firms are required to apply a fair value methodology when valuing assets. 
The GIPS standards define fair value  as the amount at which an investment could 
be sold in an orderly, arm’s-length transaction between willing parties. The valuation 
must be determined using the objective, observable, unadjusted quoted market price 
for an identical investment in an active market on the measurement date, if available. 
Fair value must include any accrued income on fixed-income securities and all other 
investments that earn interest income (the firm may choose to recognize income on 
cash and cash equivalents on a cash basis rather than an accrual basis).
If objective, observable, unadjusted quoted market prices for identical investments 
in active markets on the measurement date are not available, the GIPS standards 
recommend the following alternatives, in declining order of preference:
1. quoted prices for similar investments in active markets. If such inputs are 
not available or appropriate, then investments should be valued based on:
2. quoted prices for identical or similar investments in markets that are not 
active (markets in which there are few transactions for the investment, the 
prices are not current, or price quotations vary substantially over time and/
or between market makers). If such inputs are not available or appropriate, 
then investments should be valued based on: 
3. market-based inputs, other than quoted prices, that are observable for the 
investment. If such inputs are not available or appropriate, then investments 
should be valued based on:
4. subjective, unobservable inputs.
IMPLEMENTATION
Valuation Policies and Procedures
Firms may enter transactions involving a wide range of financial instruments, 
including derivative securities, in many different markets. It is fitting, therefore, 
that the GIPS standards not only require firms to document their valuation 
policies, procedures, methodologies, and hierarchies but also recommend that 
the valuation hierarchies be composite-or pooled fund-specific. Normally, for 
investment strategies that employ plain-vanilla securities trading in robust 
markets, quoted prices are readily available. Other composites, however, may 
represent strategies that materially make use of securities that trade infrequently 
in relatively illiquid markets where values must be imputed or estimated. Real 
estate and private equity are obvious examples, but valuing investments in swaps, 
Composite Time-Weighted Return Calculations 159
options, and other derivatives that are tied to underlying securities uniquely 
issued by specific companies may present difficulties, especially if the firm 
cannot refer to recent transactions in identical or similar assets. Implementing 
the GIPS standards offers firms an opportunity to re-examine their valuation 
policies, procedures, and methodologies and to define valuation hierarchies 
reflecting the characteristics of the securities held in each composite or pooled 
fund and the markets in which the strategy is executed. For assets valued using 
quantitative models, it is useful to list input factors such as discount rates and 
risk-adjusted cash flow projections and to review the basis for estimating them. 
Portfolio managers, security analysts, quantitative analysts, and traders should 
participate in these discussions. Once established, the valuation policies must 
be documented, followed consistently, and made available to prospective clients 
upon request.
COMPOSITE TIME-WEIGHTED RETURN 
CALCULATIONS
explain requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to 
composite return calculations, including methods for asset-weighting 
portfolio returns
The notion of composites is central to the GIPS standards. The GIPS standards define 
a composite as an aggregation of one or more portfolios that are managed according 
to a similar investment mandate, objective, or strategy. Because composite returns 
convey the firm’s investment results for a given investment mandate, objective, or 
strategy, proper composite construction is essential to achieving the ethical aims of 
the GIPS standards as well as the fair representation and full disclosure of the firm’s 
performance. Provisions relating to the construction and maintenance of composites 
can be found in Section 3 of the GIPS standards.
Candidates should read Section 3.A, Provisions 3.A.1 through 3.A.14 of the 
GIPS Standards for Firms for more complete understanding of the requirements for 
composite and pooled fund maintenance. Candidates are not responsible for the 
required provisions in Section 3 related to Wrap Fee and Carve-Outs (Provisions 
3.A.14 through 3.A.19).
To prevent firms from presenting only their best-performing portfolios to prospec -
tive clients, the GIPS standards require all actual, fee-paying, discretionary segregated 
accounts to be included in at least one composite. All actual, fee-paying, discretionary 
pooled funds must also be included in at least one composite if they meet a compos -
ite definition. Non-discretionary segregated accounts and pooled funds must not be 
included in composites. Non-fee-paying discretionary segregated accounts and pooled 
funds may  be included in a composite, but additional disclosures may be required. 
(For example, in the interest of public service or community relations, a firm might 
waive the investment management fee on a charitable organization’s portfolio, or a firm 
might use its own or its principals’ capital to implement a new investment strategy.) 
If a strategy is offered as a pooled fund and a segregated account, the pooled fund 
must be included in a composite for that strategy. The firm does need not to create a 
composite for a strategy if it is offered only as a pooled fund.5
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 160
Composite Time-Weighted Return Calculations
Time-weighted composite returns must be calculated in one of three ways: 
asset-weighting the individual portfolio returns using beginning-of-period values; 
using a method that reflects both beginning-of-period values and external cash flows; 
or using the Aggregate Return method. Exhibit 5  displays the beginning asset values 
of four portfolios that, taken together, constitute a composite. The exhibit also shows 
the external cash flows experienced by each portfolio during the month of June. For 
completeness, the exhibit also shows each portfolio’s ending fair value.
Exhibit 5: A Composite Including Four Portfolios: Weighted External Cash Flows
 Cash Flow 
Weighting  
FactorPortfolio  
($ Thousands)
A B C D Total
Beginning assets (31 May)   100.00 97.40 112.94 124.47 434.81
External cash flows            
5 June 0.83 10.00 15.00     25.00
8 June 0.73       −15.00 −15.00
17 June 0.43   −5.00     −5.00
24 June 0.20       −6.50 −6.50
29 June 0.03   −2.50   −4.00 −6.50
Ending assets (30 June)   110.55 105.20 113.30 100.50 429.55
Beginning assets + Weighted cash 
flows  108.30 107.63 112.94 112.10 440.97
Percentage of total beginning assets   23.00% 22.40% 25.97% 28.63% 100.00%
Percentage of total beginning assets 
+ Weighted cash flows  24.56% 24.41% 25.61% 25.42% 100.00%
Note:  Weighted cash flows reflect two-decimal-place precision in the weighting factors.
Determining the relative weight of each portfolio in the composite at the beginning of 
the measurement period is straightforward. Portfolio A had a beginning fair value of 
$100,000, and all four portfolios combined had a beginning fair value of approximately 
$435,000, so the weight assigned to Portfolio A is 100/434.81 = 0.23 = 23%. As we will 
show in a moment, under a method reflecting only beginning-of-period values, we 
can calculate the composite return by multiplying the individual portfolio returns by 
the portfolio’s beginning weight, then summing the products.
Determining a composite return when there are external cash flows is a little more 
complex. The cash flows must be weighted following the methodology introduced in 
our discussion of the Modified Dietz rate-of-return calculation. Each external cash 
flow is weighted in proportion to percentage of the time it is held in the portfolio 
during the measurement period as shown in Equation 4 :
   w  i   =   CD −  D  i   _ CD   
where CD is the total number of calendar days in the period and Di is the num -
ber of calendar days since the beginning of the period until the time cash flow CFi 
occurs. Exhibit 5  showed the weighting factor computed to two decimal places with 
this formula for each of the days in the measurement period (the month of June) on 
which external cash flows occur that affect any of the portfolios in the composite. It 
Composite Time-Weighted Return Calculations 161
also showed the weighted external cash flows under the two methods discussed. For 
the method incorporating weighted external cash flows, the sum of beginning assets 
and weighted external cash flows, Vp, is calculated as shown in Equation 6:
   V  p   =  V  0   +  ∑ 
i=1  n
   (  C  F  i   ×  w  i   )     (6)
where V0 is the portfolio’s beginning value and   ∑ 
i=1  n
   (  C  F  i   ×  w  i   )     is the sum of each 
portfolio’s weighted external cash inflows and outflows. Note that the right-hand side 
in Equation 6  is the denominator of the Modified Dietz formula (see Equation 4 ).
The composite return is the weighted-average return of the individual portfolios 
that belong to that composite. Under the “beginning assets” weighting method, the 
composite return calculation is shown in Equation 7:
   r  C   = ∑    ⎡
 ⎢ 
⎣   r  pi   ×    V  0,pi   _ 
  ∑ 
pi=1  n
   V  0,pi      ⎤
 ⎥ 
⎦      (7)
where rC is the composite return, rpi is the return of an individual portfolio i, V0,pi 
is the beginning value of portfolio i, and    ∑ 
pi=1  n
   V  0,pi     is the total beginning fair value of 
all the individual portfolios in the composite. In other words, the composite return 
is the sum of the individual portfolio returns weighted in proportion to their respective 
percentages of aggregate beginning assets.
Under the alternate “beginning assets plus weighted cash flows” method, shown 
in Equation 8, the return calculation uses the individual portfolios’ VP, computed 
earlier, in place of V0,p:
   r  C   = ∑    (   r  pi   ×    V  pi   _ ∑  V  pi     )      (8)
Exhibit 6  supplies each individual portfolio’s return for the month of June and presents 
the composite returns resulting from these two weighting methods.
Exhibit 6: Composite Returns
 Percentage 
of Beginning 
Assets Percentage of Beginning 
Assets + Weighted  
Cash FlowsReturn for 
Month of June
Portfolio A 23.00%   24.56% 0.51%
Portfolio B 22.40%   24.41% 0.28%
Portfolio C 25.97%   25.61% 0.32%
Portfolio D 28.63%   25.42% 1.36%
  100.00%   100.00%  
Composite Return:       
 Based on beginning assets    0.65%
 Based on beginning assets plus weighted cash flows 0.62%
Under the “beginning assets” weighting method, the composite return shown in 
Exhibit 6  is as follows:
 rC = (0.0051 × 0.23) + (0.0028 × 0.224) + (0.0032 × 0.2597) + (0.0136 × 0.2863) 
= 0.0065 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 162
 = 0.65%
Similarly, the composite return under the “beginning assets plus weighted cash flows” 
method is as follows:
 rC = (0.0051 × 0.2456) + (0.0028 × 0.2441) + (0.0032 × 0.2561) 
   + (0.0136 × 0.2542) = 0.0062 = 0.62%
The Aggregate Return method combines all the composite assets and external 
cash flows to calculate returns as if the composite were one portfolio. Beginning 
assets and intra-period external cash flows can be summed and, treating the entire 
composite as though it were a single portfolio, the return can be computed directly 
with the Modified Dietz formula. This approach can be illustrated with data from 
Exhibit 5 , using Equation 3 :
   r  ModDietz   =    V  1   −  V  0   − CF  ______________   
 V  0   +  ∑ 
i=1  n
   (  C  F  i   ×  w  i   )      
    r  C   =   429.55  − 434.81  − 25 −    (  − 15 )     −    (  − 5 )     −    (  − 6.5 )     −    (  − 6.5 )         _________________________________________    440.97  
      
=   2.74 _ 440.97   = 0.0062  = 0.62%   
Composite time-weighted returns, except for private market investment composites, 
must be calculated at least monthly. The less frequently the asset-weighting exercise is 
conducted, the greater the likelihood that composite returns will inaccurately reflect 
the constituent portfolios’ aggregate performance. 
COMPOSITES: QUALIFYING PORTFOLIOS AND 
DEFINING INVESTMENT STRATEGIES
explain the meaning of “discretionary” in the context of composite 
construction and, given a description of the relevant facts, determine 
whether a portfolio is likely to be considered discretionary
explain the role of investment mandates, objectives, or strategies in 
the construction of composites
 Investors commonly set forth investment restrictions in investment policy 
statements (IPSs). In addition to articulating the investor’s overall financial objectives, 
an IPS normally expresses a number of constraints intended to limit the investment 
risks to which the assets are exposed. For example, the IPS may limit an individual 
equity portfolio’s economic sector exposure to a certain percentage of portfolio assets 
or a certain relationship to the comparable benchmark weight: “No portfolio shall hold 
more than 15% of assets or 125% of the corresponding benchmark weight, whichever 
is greater, in any given sector, such as consumer discretionary stocks or information 
technology stocks. ” A fixed-income portfolio may be constrained to hold no securi -
ties rated below investment grade and to maintain the portfolio’s weighted-average 
duration within a specified range, such as 75% to 125% of the benchmark duration. 
These restrictions are intended to preserve the portfolios from losses in value resulting 
from inadequate sector diversification, excessive credit quality risk, or unacceptable 
levels of interest rate risk.6
Composites: Qualifying Portfolios and Defining Investment Strategies 163
Clearly, in addition to ensuring that the benchmark is appropriate, investors must 
be careful to formulate constraints that achieve their intended risk-control objectives 
without unduly impairing the portfolio managers’ ability to act on their professional 
judgment regarding the relative attractiveness of sectors and securities. In other words, 
a well-written IPS meets the client’s need for risk mitigation while respecting the 
portfolio manager’s discretion. The manager is well advised to discuss with the client 
any restrictions that are incompatible with the intended investment strategy. Upon 
accepting the investment management assignment, however, the portfolio manager 
is ethically bound by the client’s stated policies. Moreover, investment management 
agreements often incorporate the IPS, so the portfolio manager may also be legally 
required to comply with properly communicated client-specified constraints.
In some cases, the client’s investment constraints may impinge on the portfolio 
manager’s flexibility. Some clients may have environmental, social or governance 
(ESG) restrictions that prohibit investment in securities issued by companies oper -
ating in alcohol, tobacco, or gaming industries. Other clients might have restrictions 
that prohibit the sale of company stock. Additionally, legal restrictions may apply. For 
instance, a public fund might be statutorily precluded from investing in non-domestic 
securities. None of these constraints automatically renders a portfolio non-discretion -
ary. Rather, in these and other cases, the portfolio manager must determine whether 
the client-imposed constraints are likely to materially affect her ability to execute the 
investment strategy. If the constraints are determined to not have a material effect, the 
manager could include the portfolio in a composite with portfolios that have no such 
restriction. If the constraint is material, the manager may include the portfolio in a 
composite with other, similarly constrained portfolios or classify it as non-discretionary 
and exclude the portfolio from all composites. 
IMPLEMENTATION
Defining Discretion
The GIPS standards require that all actual fee-paying discretionary segregated 
accounts be included in at least one composite. (If a pooled fund meets the 
composite definition, it must be included in the composite.) Because discretion 
is a key variable that determines inclusion in or exclusion from a composite, a 
firm implementing the GIPS standards must have a clear, written definition of 
discretion. The firm must consistently apply its definition of discretion.
A client could insist that the manager retain specific holdings that might or 
might not otherwise be held in a portfolio. For example, the client could direct 
that legacy holdings with a low cost basis must not be sold because of the adverse 
tax consequences of realizing large gains. In such cases, retaining the asset in 
the portfolio may skew performance, and—whether the impact is favorable or 
unfavorable in any given measurement period—the outcome would not reflect 
the results of the manager’s actual discretionary investment management. If hold -
ing the assets hinders the manager’s ability to implement the intended strategy, 
either the entire portfolio should be considered non-discretionary and excluded 
from the firm’s composites or the individual assets should be removed and the 
remaining assets for which the manager has full discretion should be included in 
the composite. Alternately, the firm might include a materiality threshold in its 
policy, enabling it to consider a portfolio discretionary if the non-discretionary 
assets consist of less than a certain percentage of portfolio assets.
Recognizing that degrees of discretion exist, the firm must consider the inter -
actions among client-directed constraints, the portfolio’s strategy or style, and the 
investment process, notably including the financial instruments used. For example, a 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 164
client’s investment policy might prohibit the use of derivative securities such as futures, 
swaps, and options. In this case, the firm must consider whether the restriction is 
pertinent. If a portfolio manager is managing a domestic mid-cap stock portfolio, the 
fact that the client prohibits the use of derivatives may be irrelevant if the manager’s 
typical investment approach simply buys, holds, and sells common stocks. If the 
use of derivative securities is central to the firm’s implementation of the investment 
mandate, however, then the client’s policy may render the portfolio non-discretionary.
In some cases, the pattern of external cash flows might make a portfolio 
non-discretionary. For example, if a client frequently makes large withdrawals, per -
haps on a regular schedule, a portfolio manager might have to maintain such a high 
level of liquidity that he cannot truly implement the investment strategy as he does 
for other portfolios with a similar stated investment mandate, objective, or strategy.
In the process of developing, testing, and refining new investment strategies, firms 
frequently construct model portfolios and use historical security prices to simulate 
hypothetical performance in past measurement periods. No model or hypothetical 
portfolios may be included in any composite. Firms may not link the theoretical 
performance  of simulated or model portfolios with actual performance. (Model, hypo -
thetical, backtested, or simulated returns are all considered theoretical performance. 
These returns can be shown as supplemental information  but cannot be linked to 
actual composite or pooled fund returns.)
On the other hand, if the firm created a new strategy and managed portfolios in 
this strategy with its own assets—sometimes called seed money—it could include those 
portfolios from inception in appropriate composites (or, more likely, construct new 
composites reflecting the new strategies), subject to any presentation and reporting 
requirements related to the inclusion of non-fee-paying portfolios in composites.
To summarize the criteria for including portfolios in composites: 
 ■All actual, fee-paying, discretionary segregated accounts must be included 
in at least one composite.
 ■Discretionary segregated accounts that are non–fee paying may be included 
in composites, but neither non-discretionary nor simulated or model port -
folios may be included in any composite. 
 ■Pooled funds must be included in any composite for which they meet the 
composite definition.
 ■A composite must include all portfolios that meet the composite definition.
Composites—Defining Investment Strategies
Defining and constructing meaningful composites constitute a vital step toward 
achieving the ideal of fair representation and the goal of providing prospective clients 
with useful comparative information. Under the GIPS standards, composites must 
be defined according to investment mandate, objective, or strategy; composites must 
include all portfolios that meet the composite definition; and the composite defini -
tion, including detailed criteria that determine the assignment of portfolios to the 
composite, must be documented in the firm’s policies and procedures. Well-defined 
composites will be objectively representative of the firm’s products and consistent 
with the firm’s marketing strategy.
One possible hierarchy that may be helpful for the firm considering how to define 
composites is outlined as follows.
Investment Mandate  
 Asset Classes  
  Style or Strategy  
Composites: Qualifying Portfolios and Defining Investment Strategies 165
   Benchmarks  
    Risk/Return Characteristics  
A composite based on the investment mandate bears a summary product or strategy 
description, such as “Global Equities. ” This summary description may be an entirely 
acceptable composite definition as long as no significant strategic differences exist 
among the portfolios included in the composite. It is a guiding principle of composite 
definition that firms are not permitted to include portfolios with different investment 
mandates, objectives, or strategies in the same composite.
A composite based on the constituent portfolios’ asset class, such as “equity” or 
“fixed income, ” may also be acceptable; however, asset classes are broadly inclusive, 
and because generic descriptions are not very informative, asset class composites 
should be offered only if they are legitimately and meaningfully representative of the 
firm’s products.
To afford investors a better understanding of the nature of a composite, the firm 
may use an asset-class modifier indicating the composite’s investment style or strategy. 
For example, equity portfolios may be restricted to a specific economic sector, such 
as telecommunication services. Stocks issued by corporations competing in the same 
economic sector are presumably affected more or less the same way by exogenous 
factors such as changes in raw material prices, consumer demand, or the general level 
of interest rates.
Portfolios might also be classified according to a defined style. An equity style 
matrix that classifies portfolios by capitalization (large cap, mid-cap, and small cap) 
and by style (value; core, also called neutral, market oriented, or blend; and growth) 
might be the starting point for defining a set of composites. Fixed-income portfolios 
may be classified by a combination of duration and/or market segment that generally 
aligns with the major fixed-income indexes. 
A portfolio may be assigned to one of the style categories based on the 
money-weighted averages of pertinent characteristics of the portfolio’s holdings. For 
example, a portfolio holding stocks with an average market capitalization of $5 billion 
along with a relatively high price-to-earnings multiple, a relatively high price-to-book 
ratio, and a relatively low dividend yield, would likely be identified as a mid-cap growth 
portfolio. Alternately, the portfolio’s historical monthly or quarterly returns might 
be regressed against the returns of pertinent capital market indexes to determine 
which style-specific benchmarks best explain the portfolio’s performance. Evaluating 
the comparative merits of these approaches falls outside the scope of this reading. 
Suffice it to say that, given the widespread acceptance of these categories, a firm may 
meaningfully and usefully define composites with reference to the capitalization range 
and the style in which the constituent portfolios are managed.
IMPLEMENTATION
Defining Composites
One of the greatest challenges in implementing the GIPS standards is devising 
the set of composites that will most meaningfully represent the firm’s products. 
A firm must create composites for the firm’s strategies that are managed for 
or offered as a segregated account. Composites must be defined according to 
investment mandate, objective, or strategy. What appears to be a straightforward 
exercise—defining composites and assigning portfolios to them—may prove 
rather difficult in practice.
A useful guideline is to build a set of composites that will accurately represent 
the firm’s distinct investment strategies. With too few composites, a firm risks 
overlooking significant differences and grouping diverse portfolios together 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 166
into a single, overly broad composite subject to a wide dispersion of portfolio 
returns. With too many composites, in addition to incurring unnecessary costs, 
the firm runs the risk of creating narrowly defined groupings that are too much 
alike in investment strategy, contain too few portfolios or assets to be useful, or 
compromise client confidentiality.
Assuming that the definitions of the “firm” and “discretion” have been 
agreed upon and that a master list of portfolios has been compiled, here is a 
common-sense strategy a firm might follow to reach agreement on composite 
definitions.
1. Review the firm’s organizational structure and investment process to 
see if distinctive strategies can be readily identified. For instance, an 
equity advisor might have units specializing in one or more active 
management strategies as well as index fund construction and quanti -
tatively driven enhanced indexing.
2. Review the firm’s existing marketing materials to determine which 
strategies are offered as a segregated account. If possible, review 
marketing materials from competitors and recently received requests 
for proposals (RFPs) to determine how the industry defines products 
similar to those the firm offers.
3. Construct a provisional framework using descriptive captions to iden -
tify possible composites.
4. Taking into consideration the clients’ investment policies, test how 
well the firm’s fee-paying, discretionary portfolios would fit the pro -
visional framework. The inevitable identification of exceptions—that 
is, the discovery that some segregated accounts do not really fit any 
composite defined in the provisional framework—will lead to the 
redefinition of proposed composites or the creation of new compos -
ites. Several iterations may be needed.
5. Review the proposed set of composites to ensure that, in the aggre -
gate, the composites are likely to satisfy the requirements of the GIPS 
standards.
6. Document the composite definitions in detail and circulate the defini -
tions for final review by all affected parties within the firm.
Of course, the most effective process for defining composites may differ 
from one firm to another in view of variables such as organizational structure, 
culture, and investment strategies, among other factors. Nonetheless, composite 
definitions have lasting consequences, and it is highly desirable to have a plan 
for reaching consensus.
Firms may also define composites based on the portfolios’ benchmarks, as long as 
the benchmarks reflect the investment strategy and the firm has no other composites 
with the same characteristics. This approach is particularly appropriate if the portfolios 
are limited to holding stocks that are held in the index.
Finally, portfolios sharing distinctive risk/return profiles may reasonably be grouped 
together. For example, enhanced index funds with benchmark-specific targeted excess 
returns and tracking error tolerances might fall into natural groups.
Fixed-income composites can likewise be meaningfully and usefully defined in 
many dimensions. For example, composites might conform to asset classes or market 
segments such as government debt, mortgage-backed securities, convertible bonds, 
or high-yield bonds; investment strategies such as fundamental credit analysis, sec -
tor rotation, or interest rate anticipation; or investment styles such as indexing or 
Composites: Including and Excluding Portfolios 167
core-plus. However a firm chooses to define the composites representing its invest -
ment products, those composites must consist of portfolios managed in accordance 
with similar investment strategies or objectives.
COMPOSITES: INCLUDING AND EXCLUDING 
PORTFOLIOS
explain requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to 
composite construction, including switching portfolios among 
composites, the timing of the inclusion of new portfolios in 
composites, and the timing of the exclusion of terminated portfolios 
from composites
The GIPS standards governing composite construction require that composites 
include new portfolios on a timely and consistent basis after the portfolio comes 
under management. Firms are required to establish, document, and consistently 
apply a policy of including new portfolios in the appropriate composites on a timely 
basis. For many strategies, new portfolios should be included as of the beginning of 
the next full performance measurement period after the firm receives the funds. If 
composite returns are calculated monthly and a portfolio is funded on 20 May, the 
composite should include the new portfolio as of the beginning of June. It may take 
time to invest the assets of a new portfolio in accordance with the desired investment 
strategy, however, particularly when the portfolio is funded in kind (that is, with secu -
rities other than cash and cash equivalents) and the assets have to be redeployed, or 
when the securities to be purchased are relatively illiquid (e.g., in emerging markets). 
Accordingly, the GIPS standards give firms some discretion to determine when to add 
the new portfolio to a composite. In such cases, the firm must establish a policy on a 
composite-by-composite basis and apply it consistently to all new portfolios.
In addition to winning new business, firms routinely lose relationships. Under the 
GIPS standards, a firm must include a terminated portfolio in the historical performance 
of the appropriate composite through the last full measurement period in which the 
firm had the discretion to manage the portfolio to the strategy. In many cases, the firm 
loses its discretion over the portfolio upon being notified of a pending termination. 
For instance, the client may instruct the firm to stop buying securities immediately 
and to commence the liquidation of holdings in preparation for an outbound cash 
transfer on a specified date. Alternately, the client may halt trading and transfer control 
of the portfolio to a transition management organization to facilitate moving assets 
to a new firm. When the firm being terminated loses its discretion over the portfolio, 
it should include the portfolio in the composite through the last full measurement 
period prior to notification of termination. To use the same example, if a firm that 
calculates performance monthly is informed on 20 May that its management contract 
is being terminated effective 31 May and is instructed to stop trading forthwith, then 
the firm should include the portfolio in its composite only through 30 April. In any 
event, it is incumbent upon the GIPS-compliant firm to have defined and documented 
its policies governing the removal of terminated portfolios from composites and, of 
course, to apply those policies consistently.7
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 168
IMPLEMENTATION
Adding, Removing, and Switching Portfolios
GIPS-compliant firms must have written policies setting forth when portfolios 
may be added to or removed from composites. These policies should be com -
posite-specific. For a firm that reports composite performance monthly, a policy 
statement could read as follows:
“ All new portfolios funded with cash or securities on or before the 15th day 
of the month shall be added to the appropriate composite at the beginning 
of the following month. All new portfolios funded with cash or securities 
after the 15th day of the month shall be added to the appropriate compos -
ite at the beginning of the second month after funding. All terminating 
portfolios will be removed from the composite at the end of the last full 
month for which the firm has full discretion. The historical performance 
of terminated portfolios shall remain in the appropriate composite. ”
Policies like the foregoing sample allow firms a reasonable amount of time 
to implement the strategy without delaying inclusion of the portfolio in the 
appropriate composite. Each firm must develop a policy that conforms to its own 
investment process while meeting the GIPS standards requirement to include 
portfolios in composites on a timely basis. Here is a sample statement for a policy:
“Portfolios shall not be moved from one composite to another unless the 
composite is redefined or documented changes in the client’s guidelines 
require restructuring the portfolio in such a way that another compos -
ite becomes more appropriate. The portfolio shall be removed from the 
original composite at the end of the last calendar month before the event 
causing the removal occurred and shall be added to the appropriate new 
composite at the beginning of the calendar month following the date on 
which the portfolio is substantially invested. The historical performance 
of the portfolio shall remain in the original composite. ”
The firm’s policy for adding portfolios to or removing portfolios from a compos -
ite must also include language outlining conditions under which a portfolio may be 
switched from one composite to another. The GIPS standards stipulate that portfolios 
cannot be switched from one composite to another unless documented changes in 
the portfolio’s investment mandate, objective, or strategy or the redefinition of the 
composite make it appropriate. The historical performance of the portfolio must 
remain with the original composite. This is an important requirement; if the GIPS 
standards permitted firms to transfer portfolios from one composite to another at will, 
an unethical firm might identify and exploit opportunities to improve the reported 
performance of selected composites by re-populating them with the portfolios whose 
investment results were most advantageous during the measurement period.
The GIPS standards describe two conditions under which portfolios can be reas -
signed. First, a portfolio can be switched from one composite to another if the client 
revises the mandate, objective, or strategy governing the investment of portfolio 
assets and the guideline changes are documented. For instance, a client might decide 
to modify the portfolio mandate from mid-cap value to large-cap value, or from 
domestic equity to global equity, with a corresponding change in the benchmark, 
while retaining the same investment advisor to restructure and manage the “same” 
portfolio in accordance with the new strategy. Or perhaps a client might decide to 
allow the use of derivative securities, previously prohibited, triggering a change in 
the investment strategy and making it suitable to assign the portfolio to a composite 
made up of portfolios that use derivatives.
Presentation and Reporting Requirements for Composites 169
Second, a portfolio can be reassigned to another composite if the original composite 
is redefined in such a way that the portfolio no longer fits it. Generally, if a strategy 
changes over time, it is most appropriate to create a new composite; accordingly, the 
redefinition of an existing composite should be a highly unusual event.
In the event of significant cash flows , a portfolio may be temporarily removed 
from the composite.
A significant cash flow is a client-directed cash flow sufficiently large that it may 
temporarily prevent the firm from implementing the strategy. Significant cash flows are 
more likely to be an issue for strategies such as fixed income and emerging markets, 
wherein the liquidity of the underlying securities inhibits the ability to quickly invest 
the incoming cash or to conduct an orderly sale of portfolio securities to meet a cash 
outflow. Firms must define “significant” on an ex ante , composite-specific basis and 
must consistently follow the composite-specific significant cash flow policy.
Alternatively, firms may use temporary new accounts  to remove the effect of a 
significant cash flow. Firms adopting this approach place client-initiated incoming 
cash and securities into a temporary account that is not included in any composite 
until the external cash flows have been invested in accordance with the portfolio’s 
investment mandate, objective, or strategy, at which time they would be transferred 
into the main portfolio and treated as an external cash flow. Relatedly, when the client 
initiates a large capital withdrawal, the firm transfers cash and securities in the desired 
amount to a temporary account until it liquidates the securities and the funds are 
distributed. The transfer is treated as an external cash outflow when calculating the 
portfolio’s time-weighted total return.
The provisions governing composite construction additionally address the issue 
of minimum asset levels. A firm might decide that a particular composite will not 
include any portfolios whose value is below a specified level, on the grounds, for 
instance, that the investment strategy can be fully implemented only for portfolios 
above a certain size. Portfolios below the minimum asset level would be considered 
non-discretionary with respect to that composite. If a firm establishes a minimum 
asset level for a composite, it must document policies addressing how portfolios will 
be treated if they fall below the minimum. As an example, a firm may elect to remove 
portfolios the month after they fall below the minimum. As another example, the firm 
may determine that the minimum asset level required to add a portfolio to a com -
posite is $1 million but that a portfolio will not be removed  from a composite unless 
its assets fall below $900,000. The GIPS standards further state that any changes to a 
composite-specific minimum asset level must not be applied retroactively.
If a portfolio is removed from a composite because it fell below the minimum, 
its prior performance must remain in the composite. The firm must determine if the 
portfolio that has been removed meets any other composite definition and include it 
in the appropriate composite in a timely and consistent manner.
PRESENTATION AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
FOR COMPOSITES
explain requirements of the GIPS standards with respect to 
presentation and reporting
explain the conditions under which the performance of a past firm 
or affiliation may be linked to or used to represent the historical 
performance of a new or acquiring firm8
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 170
Firms claiming compliance with the GIPS standards must make every reasonable 
effort to provide a GIPS Report to all prospective clients and limited distribution 
pooled fund investors. The GIPS Report must be one that represents the strategy 
being marketed to the prospect. 
There are two types of GIPS Reports: a GIPS Composite Report  and a GIPS 
Pooled Fund Report . A GIPS Composite Report includes all of the information 
required by the GIPS standards for a specific composite. A GIPS Pooled Fund Report 
includes all of the information required by the GIPS standards for a specific pooled 
fund. Sections 4 and 5 of the 2020 GIPS Standards for Firms address the requirements 
and recommendations for GIPS Composite Time-Weighted and Money-Weighted 
Return Reports, respectively. In this section, we will focus on certain required elements 
of the time-weighted return reports.
Candidates should read Provisions 4.A.1 through 4.A.12 and 4.A.18 of the GIPS 
Standards for Firms for a more complete understanding of the requirements relat -
ing to Composite Time-Weighted Return Reports. Candidates are not responsible 
for Provisions 4.A.13 through 4.A.17 relating to carve-outs and overlay strategy 
and wrap fee composites.
Minimum Years of Performance 
For each GIPS Composite Report that includes time-weighted returns, the GIPS 
standards require that firms show at least 5 years of annual performance (unless the 
composite has been in existence for less than 5 years) and that the GIPS-compliant 
performance record must then be extended each year until at least 10 years of per -
formance have been presented. If the composite has been in existence for less than 
5 years, the firm may present returns since inception and build over time to the 10 
years of required returns. 
Required Elements of a GIPS Composite Report
The core elements of a GIPS Composite Report that presents a time-weighted return 
include the following:
 ■composite and benchmark annual returns for all years;
 ■the number of portfolios (if six or more) in the composite at each period 
end;
 ■the amount of assets in the composite;
 ■the amount of total firm assets at the end of each period;
 ■a measure of internal dispersion  of individual portfolio returns for each 
annual period if the composite contains six or more portfolios for the full 
year; and
 ■if monthly composite returns are available, a three-year annualized ex post  
standard deviation of the composite and benchmark returns as of each 
annual period end.
Dispersion Measures
The GIPS standards require that for each annual period a measure of internal disper -
sion of the returns earned by individual portfolios in the composite be presented. This 
important requirement is intended to allow users to see how consistently the firm 
implemented its strategy across individual portfolios. A wide range of results should 
prompt the recipient of the performance presentation to inquire about possible causes 
Presentation and Reporting Requirements for Composites 171
of the variability of returns to portfolios that are purportedly managed in accordance 
with the same strategy. It may suggest, among many other possibilities, that the com -
posite is defined too broadly to provide meaningful information.
The dispersion of annual returns for individual portfolios within a composite can 
be measured in various ways. The GIPS Glossary entry for internal dispersion men -
tions several acceptable methods. Let us refer to the data in Exhibit 7 , showing the 
beginning values (in euros) and the annual rates of return earned by the 14 portfolios 
that were in a German equity composite for the full year 20XX. (Note that only those 
portfolios in the composite for the entire year are included in the calculation of this 
dispersion measure.) The portfolios presented in Exhibit 7  are arrayed in descending 
order of returns.
Exhibit 7: Data for Calculation of Dispersion
 
PortfolioBeginning  
Value20XX  
Return
A €118,493 2.66%
B €79,854 2.64%
C €121,562 2.53%
D €86,973 2.49%
E €105,491 2.47%
F €112,075 2.42%
G €98,667 2.38%
H €92,518 2.33%
I €107,768 2.28%
J €96,572 2.21%
K €75,400 2.17%
L €77,384 2.07%
M €31,264 1.96%
N €84,535 1.93%
The Glossary in the GIPS Standards for Firms defines internal dispersion  as “a measure 
of the spread of the annual returns of individual portfolios within a composite” and 
indicates that acceptable measures include, but are not limited to, high/low, range, 
and the equal-weighted or asset-weighted standard deviation of portfolio returns. 
Using the data in Exhibit 7 , we will consider each of these measures.
The simplest method of expressing internal dispersion for an annual period is to 
disclose the highest and lowest returns earned by portfolios that were in the composite 
for the full year. In the case of the German equity composite, the highest return was 
2.66% and the lowest was 1.93%. As an alternative, the high/low range—the arithmetic 
difference between the highest and the lowest return—might also be presented. In this 
case it was 0.73%, or 73 bps. In either form, the high/low disclosure is easy to under -
stand. It has a potential disadvantage, however. In any annual period, an outlier—that 
is, one portfolio with an abnormally high or low return—may be present, resulting 
in a measure of dispersion that is not entirely representative of the distribution of 
returns. Although they are more difficult to calculate and to interpret, other dispersion 
measures may convey better information.
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 172
The standard deviation of returns for portfolios included in the composite is 
another acceptable measure of internal dispersion. As applied to composites, standard 
deviation measures the cross-sectional dispersion of returns for portfolios included in 
the composite for the full year. The standard deviation for a composite in which the 
constituent portfolios are equally weighted is calculated using Equation 9:
   S  c   =  √ ____________
      ∑ i=1  n
    (   r  i   −    _ r    c   )      2
   ____________  n      (9)
where ri is the return of each individual portfolio,     _ r    c    is the equal-weighted mean 
or arithmetic mean return to the portfolios in the composite, and n is the number of 
portfolios in the composite. Applying Equation 9  to the portfolio data given in Exhibit 
7, assuming equal weighting, the mean return is 2.32% and the standard deviation is 
22 bps (0.22%). If the individual portfolio returns are normally distributed around the 
mean return, then approximately two-thirds of the portfolios will have returns falling 
between the mean plus the standard deviation (2.32% + 0.22% = 2.54%) and the mean 
minus the standard deviation (2.32% − 0.22% = 2.10%).
Some firms prefer to present the asset-weighted standard deviation rather than 
the equal-weighted standard deviation. The asset-weighted standard deviation of 
individual portfolio returns within a composite can be calculated using Equation 10:
   S   C  aw     =  √ _____________________    ∑ 
i=1  n
   [    (   r  i   −    _ r    proxy   )     2
  ×  w  i   ]       (10)
where     _ r    proxy    is the asset-weighted mean return of portfolios 1 through n (see 
Equation 9 ); wi is the weight of portfolio i, calculated as the ratio of the beginning 
value of portfolio i to the total beginning value of the assets of portfolios 1 through 
n, that is,   w  i   =    V  0,i   _  V  0, Total     ; and the sum of the weights w1 through wn is 1.
     _ r    proxy   =  ∑ 
i=1  n
   (   w  i   ×  r  i   )     (11)
Applying Equation 11  and 12 to the data given in Exhibit 7 , we find that the 
asset-weighted standard deviation is 21 bps (0.21%).
Note that the GIPS standards do not limit firms to using one of the measures 
of internal dispersion described here. A firm may prefer another way of expressing 
composite dispersion. The method chosen should, however, fairly represent the range 
of returns for each annual period.
The 2020 GIPS Standards for Firms also require that firms present information about 
the historical variability of composite and benchmark returns. Specifically, the GIPS 
standards state that, where monthly composite returns are available, firms must present, 
as of each annual period end, the three-year annualized ex post  standard deviation 
of the monthly returns of both the composite and the benchmark. The rationale is to 
give prospective clients an indication of the risk of an investment strategy as executed 
by the firms under consideration. Because all GIPS Composite Reports include the 
same risk measure, and that measure is based on historical experience rather than 
subjective inputs, the GIPS standards allow for some degree of comparability among 
firms that claim compliance.
Portability
The “portability” of past performance is a complex and sometimes contentious subject. 
Performance from a past firm or affiliation may be linked to the performance of the 
new or acquiring firm if the new or acquiring firm meets certain requirements. The 
requirements, which apply on a composite-specific basis, are that (1) substantially 
all the investment decision makers are employed by the new or acquiring firm, (2) 
the decision-making process remains substantially intact and independent within 
Presentation and Reporting Requirements for Composites 173
the new or acquiring firm, (3) the new or acquiring firm has records that document 
and support the reported performance, and (4) there must be no break in the track 
record between the past firm or affiliation and the new or acquiring firm. If there is 
a break in the track record between the past firm and the new or acquiring firm, and 
if the first three portability tests are met, then the performance from the past firm or 
affiliation may be used to represent the historical performance of the new or acquiring 
firm—but the two performance records may not be linked. If a GIPS-compliant firm 
acquires another firm or affiliation, the firm is given a one-year “grace period” to bring 
any non-compliant assets into compliance for future reporting periods.
Sample Reports
Appendices A and B of the 2020 GIPS Standards for Firms contain several sample 
GIPS Composite and Pooled Fund Reports. We have included Sample 1 in Exhibit 8 .
Exhibit 8: Composite with Time-Weighted Returns 
Spinning Top Investments Large-Cap Growth Composite, 1 February 2011–31 December 2020
Y earCompos -
ite Gross 
Return 
TWR (%)Compos -
ite Net 
Return 
TWR (%)Benchmark 
Return (%)3-Y ear Std Deviation
Num -
ber of 
PortfoliosInternal 
Dispersion 
(%)Compos -
ite Assets 
($ M)Firm 
Assetsb ($ 
M)Compos -
ite Gross 
(%)Benchmark 
(%)
2011a2.18 1.25 1.17     31 n/a 165 n/a
2012 18.66 17.49 15.48     34 2 235 n/a
2013 41.16 39.90 33.36     39 5.7 344 n/a
2014 14.50 13.37 13.03 11.30 9.59 45 2.8 445 1,032
2015 6.52 5.47 5.67 12.51 10.68 48 3.1 520 1,056
2016 8.22 7.15 7.09 12.95 11.15 49 2.8 505 1,185
2017 33.78 32.48 30.18 12.29 10.53 44 2.9 475 1,269
2018 -0.84 -1.83 -0.65 13.26 11.91 47 3.1 493 1,091
2019 33.08 31.78 29.76 12.81 11.71 51 3.5 549 1,252
2020 7.51 6.44 6.30 13.74 12.37 54 2.5 575 1,414
aReturns are for the period 1 February 2011 to 31 December 2011.
bSpinning Top investments acquired the composite through an acquisition of ABC Capital in May 2014. 
Firm assets prior to 2014 are not presented because the composite was not part of the firm.
Disclosures
1. Spinning Top Investments claims compliance with the Global 
Investment Performance Standards (GIPS®) and has prepared and 
presented this report in compliance with the GIPS standards. Spinning 
Top Investments has been independently verified for the periods 1 
January 2011 to 31 December 2020. The verification report is available 
upon request. A firm that claims compliance with the GIPS standards 
must establish policies and procedures for complying with all the 
applicable requirements of the GIPS standards. Verification provides 
assurance on whether the firm’s policies and procedures related to 
composite and pooled fund maintenance, as well as the calculation, 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 174
presentation, and distribution of performance, have been designed in 
compliance with the GIPS standards and have been implemented on a 
firm-wide basis. Verification does not provide assurance on the accu -
racy of any specific performance report.
2. Spinning Top Investments is an equity investment manager that 
invests solely in US-based securities. Spinning Top Investments is 
defined as an independent investment management firm that is not 
affiliated with any parent organization. Spinning Top Investments 
acquired ABC Capital in May 2014.
3. The Large Cap Growth Composite includes all institutional portfolios 
that invest in large-cap US stocks that are considered to have growth 
in earnings prospects that are superior to that of the average company 
within the XYZ Large Cap Growth Index. Key material risks include 
the risks that stock prices will decline and that the composite will 
underperform its benchmark. The account minimum for the compos -
ite is $5 million. Prior to July 2016, the account minimum was $2 mil -
lion. Prior to March 2020, the name of the composite was the Growth 
Composite.
4. Performance prior to May 2014 occurred while the investment man -
agement team was affiliated with another firm. The investment man -
agement team has managed the composite since its inception, and the 
investment process has not changed. The historical performance has 
been linked to performance earned at Spinning Top Investments.
5. The benchmark is the XYZ Large Cap Growth Index, a market-cap -
italization-weighted equity index of all US stocks with a market cap 
greater than $10 billion and a growth tilt.
6. Returns presented are time-weighted returns. Valuations are com -
puted and performance is reported in US dollars.
7. Gross-of-fees returns are presented before management and custodial 
fees but after all trading expenses. Composite and benchmark returns 
are presented gross of non-reclaimable withholding taxes. Net-of-
fees returns are calculated by deducting a model management fee 
of 0.083%, 1/12th of the highest management fee of 1.00%, from the 
monthly gross composite return. The management fee schedule for 
separate accounts is as follows: 1.00% on the first $25 million; 0.60% 
thereafter. The management fee schedule and total expense ratio for 
the Large Cap Collective Fund, which is included in the composite, are 
0.65% on all assets and 0.93%, respectively.
8. Policies for valuing investments, calculating performance, and prepar -
ing GIPS reports are available upon request.
9. A list of composite descriptions and a list of broad distribution pooled 
funds are available upon request.
10. The composite was created in November 2011, and the inception date 
is 1 February 2011.
11. As of 1 January 2014, internal dispersion is calculated using the equal-
weighted standard deviation of annual gross returns of those portfo -
lios that were included in the composite for the entire year. Prior to 
2014, internal dispersion was calculated using asset-weighted standard 
deviation.
Verification 175
12. The three-year annualized standard deviation measures the variability 
of the composite gross returns and the benchmark returns over the 
preceding 36-month period.
13. Effective 1 November 2011, portfolios are removed from the com -
posite if they have a significant cash flow. A significant cash flow is 
defined as a contribution or withdrawal greater than 25% of the begin -
ning market value of a portfolio. The portfolio is removed from the 
composite for the month in which the significant cash flow occurred.
14. GIPS® is a registered trademark of CFA Institute. CFA Institute does 
not endorse or promote this organization, nor does it warrant the 
accuracy or quality of the content contained herein.
VERIFICATION
discuss the purpose, scope, and process of verification
Verification may be informally and unofficially characterized as a process in which an 
independent expert assesses a firm’s policies and procedures for constructing com -
posites and calculating and presenting performance in light of the requirements of 
the GIPS standards. Verification is intended to provide the firm and the users of its 
GIPS Reports greater confidence in its claim of compliance with the GIPS standards. 
Verification does not provide assurance as to the accuracy of any particular compos -
ite or pooled fund presentation. In addition to making the claim of compliance on a 
firm-wide basis more credible, however, the verification process may benefit the firm 
in other ways: increased knowledge in the performance measurement team, consis -
tently higher quality of performance presentations, improved internal processes and 
procedures, and potential marketing advantages. Above all, verification supports the 
guiding principles of fair representation and full disclosure of investment performance.
The GIPS standards recommend that firms undergo verification.
IMPLEMENTATION
Selecting a Verification Firm 
Verification is a major undertaking, and it is crucial for the investment manage -
ment firm to choose an independent verifier whose resources match the firm’s 
needs. At the outset of the selection process, the investment management firm 
approaching verification should consider the scope of its operations and the 
nature of its products. The requirements of a large investment management 
organization with a presence in markets around the world will differ from those 
of a firm operating in only a single country. Similarly, a hedge fund manager, a 
manager who engages in real estate or private equity investing, a quantitatively 
oriented manager whose investment strategies rely heavily on the use of deriv -
ative securities, or a manager who manages tax-aware portfolios for individuals 
may have more specialized requirements than a manager who manages funds 
for tax-exempt institutions such as pension plans and charitable foundations. 
These factors should be communicated to potential verifiers and reflected in 
the selection criteria.9
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 176
Some organizations have standard RFP templates that can be adapted for 
specific purposes. The RFP should include a description of the issuing organi -
zation and a statement on the scope of the project. Firms investigating verifiers’ 
qualifications might consider conducting an internet search and initially asking 
RFP respondents for the following information:
 ■a description of the verification firm, including its history, ownership, 
and organizational structure; a description of the performance-related 
services it offers; and a representative list of verification assignments 
completed indicating the nature of the investment management firm 
verified (e.g., “institutional client division of a regional bank”);
 ■an explanation of the firm’s approach to project management, sam -
pling, and testing;
 ■the roles and biographies, including professional designations, of the 
verifiers who will be assigned to this project;
 ■client references, including contact details, and information about the 
number of clients added and lost over a specific period (for instance, 
the last three years);
 ■the verification firm’s fees; and
 ■a preliminary project plan setting forth the major tasks and estimated 
timeframes for completion of the verification.
Scope of Verification
Verification, which must be performed by a qualified and independent third party, 
provides assurance on whether the firm’s policies and procedures related to composite 
and pooled fund maintenance, as well as the calculation, presentation, and distribution 
of performance have been designed in compliance with the GIPS standards and have 
been implemented on a firm-wide basis. A verifier must conduct the verification in 
accordance with the GIPS Standards for Verifiers.
A single verification report is issued only with respect to the whole firm; verifica -
tion cannot be carried out on a single composite or pooled fund. If a firm does not 
meet all the requirements of the GIPS standards, it may not state or in any other way 
represent that it is in compliance with the GIPS standards—a firm cannot claim that a 
single composite is “in compliance, ” or that all the equity strategies are “in compliance. ”
A firm that is verified may choose to have a detailed performance examination  
conducted on one or more specific composites or pooled funds, and it may state that 
a composite has been examined if a performance examination report has been issued 
for the specific composite.
Verification Process
The GIPS Standards for Verifiers outlines various procedures that verifiers must follow 
in the course of conducting a verification. We will focus here on the requirements 
for planning, sample selection and testing, as these elements will help the reader 
understand the scope and process of verification.
Verifiers must learn about the firm, including its corporate structure and how it 
operates, and they must understand the firm’s policies and procedures for complying 
with all applicable requirements and adopted recommendations of the GIPS standards. 
Verifiers must not only obtain a copy of the firm’s GIPS-related policies and procedures 
Verification 177
but also ensure that all applicable policies and procedures are properly included and 
adequately documented. Finally, verifiers must understand the policies, procedures, and 
methodologies the firm uses to value portfolios and compute investment performance.
Although verification is conducted on a firm-wide basis, verifiers may use a sam -
pling methodology to conduct the required testing. When selecting sample portfolios, 
verifiers must take into consideration the number of composites and pooled funds at 
the firm and the number of portfolios in each composite. In addition, verifiers must 
also take into account the total assets under management, the internal control structure 
at the firm, the number of years being verified, the systems used in the construction 
and maintenance of composites, the method of calculating performance, and whether 
the firm uses external performance measurement services. The selection of sample 
accounts for testing is a critical step in the verification process. If the verifier encoun -
ters errors or discovers that the firm’s record-keeping is deficient, a larger sample or 
additional verification procedures may be warranted.
IMPLEMENTATION
Preparing for Verification
The investment management firm undertaking verification should gather the 
following information. The verifiers may use this information to prepare a fee 
estimate and a project plan, and they will need it in the course of the review.
 ■information about the firm, including its corporate structure and the 
types of investment product it manages;
 ■sample GIPS Reports and marketing materials;
 ■all of the firm’s policies and procedures used to establish and main -
tain compliance with the GIPS standards, such as the firm’s definition 
of discretion, the sources, methods, and review procedures for asset 
valuations, the time-weighted rate-of-return calculation methodology, 
the treatment of external cash flows, the computation of composite 
returns, the correction of errors, etc.;
 ■the complete list of composite and limited distribution pooled fund 
descriptions and a list of all broad distribution pooled funds (descrip -
tions are not required for broad distribution pooled funds);
 ■composite definitions, including benchmarks and the criteria for 
including portfolios;
 ■a list of all portfolios under management, with each portfolio’s value;
 ■a list of all the portfolios that have been in each composite during the 
verification period, the dates they were in the composites, and docu -
mentation supporting any changes to the portfolios in the composites; 
and
 ■a list of all portfolios excluded from all composites.
 The verifiers will require the investment management agreements and 
investment policy statements for selected portfolios and historical portfolio- and 
composite-level performance data for sampling and testing. Although the items 
listed here represent a good starting point for initiating a verification, other 
information requirements will likely surface during the course of the verification.
Verifiers must perform sufficient testing procedures to determine that the firm 
satisfies certain fundamental requirements with respect to recordkeeping, policies and 
procedures (including error correction policies), the definition of the firm, the com -
pleteness of the list of composite and limited distribution pooled fund descriptions, 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 178
and the calculation of total firm assets. Verifiers must conduct a series of tests to 
determine that portfolios are properly assigned to composites and that portfolios 
not included in composites have been properly excluded. They must evaluate outlier 
returns within a sample of the firm’s composites for possible indications of errors in 
return calculation and/or mis-assignment of a portfolio to the composite. 
Verifiers must review selected portfolios to determine that the treatment of cer -
tain input data is consistent with the firm’s policies and the requirements of the GIPS 
standards. The GIPS standards specifically identify the classification of portfolio flows 
(for example, receipts, disbursements, dividends, interest, fees, and taxes) as one such 
item. Other items to evaluate include the treatment of: dividend and interest income; 
taxes, tax reclaims, and tax accruals; fees and expenses; and the accounting treatment 
and valuation methodologies for investments.
The verifier must determine that portfolio holdings, income, and cash flows used in 
calculating returns are supported by documentation from independent third parties, 
such as custodial or brokerage statements, as applicable.
We have already stressed that verification does not provide assurance that specific 
composite or pooled fund returns are correctly calculated and presented. Nonetheless, 
testing the firm’s performance-related calculations is an important element of the ver -
ification process. Verifiers must determine that the firm has calculated and presented 
performance in accordance with the requirements of the GIPS standards as well as 
with the firm’s policies and procedures. In so doing, they must recalculate rates of 
return for selected portfolios and composites to confirm that a return formula that 
meets the requirements of the GIPS standards is used and that fees and expenses 
have been treated in conformity with both the GIPS standards and the firm’s policies 
and procedures.
Testing the construction and maintenance of composites is central to the verification 
process. Verifiers must obtain a list of all portfolios in the composite, including closed 
portfolios; select a sampling of new, existing, and closed portfolios for review; and 
perform sufficient procedures to determine that the selected portfolios are appropriately 
classified as discretionary or non-discretionary. In making this determination, verifiers 
will refer to the firm’s policies and procedures related to investment discretion and the 
selected portfolios’ investment management agreements and/or investment guidelines.
Verifiers must determine that portfolios sharing the same investment mandate, 
objective, or strategy are included in the same composite and that the timing of portfo -
lios’ inclusion in and exclusion from composites is in accordance with the firm’s policies 
and procedures. Finally, verifiers must determine that portfolios’ movements from 
one composite to another are appropriate and consistent with the redefinition of the 
composite or documented changes to the investment mandate, objective, or strategy. 
Finally, verifiers must test a sample of GIPS Reports to ensure that the calculations 
are accurate and that the report includes all the required information and disclo -
sures. Moreover, the information and disclosures must be consistent with the firm’s 
documented policies and procedures and the firm’s records. The verifier must also 
evaluate a sample of the firm’s marketing materials to ensure that when an advertise -
ment references the GIPS standards, the reference to the GIPS standards is proper, 
calculations in the advertisement are correct, and the advertisement includes all the 
required information and disclosures.
We have remarked that verification alone, without a specifically focused perfor -
mance examination, does not ensure that any particular presentation of composite or 
pooled fund performance meets the requirements of the GIPS standards or represents 
investment results fairly, completely, and accurately. A verification report issued by a 
verifier who meets or exceeds the required verification procedures, as summarized here, 
lends additional credibility to the firm’s claim of compliance with the GIPS standards.
Verification 179
SUMMARY
The Global Investment Performance Standards for Firms meet the need for globally 
accepted standards for investment management firms in calculating and presenting 
their results to clients and prospective clients. The GIPS standards will continue to 
evolve to address additional aspects of performance presentation. Firms that claim 
compliance must meet all applicable requirements, including not only the provisions of 
the GIPS standards but also any Guidance Statements, interpretations, and Questions 
& Answers published by CFA Institute and the GIPS standards governing bodies. 
Practitioners should register for the GIPS Newsletter to stay informed about existing 
and new requirements and recommended best practices. CFA Institute and other 
organizations offer publications and conduct conferences and workshops designed 
to help practitioners implement and maintain compliance with the GIPS standards.
This reading has made the following points:
 ■Only investment management firms and asset owners that manage assets 
on a discretionary basis—and compete for business—may claim compliance 
with the GIPS Standards for Firms.
 ■The objectives of the GIPS standards are as follows: (1) Promote investor 
interests and instill investor confidence; (2) ensure accurate and consistent 
data; (3) obtain worldwide acceptance of a single standard for calculating 
and presenting performance; (4) promote fair, global competition among 
investment firms; and (5) promote industry self-regulation on a global basis.
 ■When the GIPS standards conflict with law and/or regulations regarding the 
calculation and presentation of performance, firms must comply with the 
law or regulations and disclose the conflict in the GIPS Report. 
 ■Required fundamentals of compliance with the GIPS standards include 
properly defining the firm, providing GIPS Reports to all prospective cli -
ents/investors, adhering to applicable laws and regulations, and ensuring 
that information presented is not false or misleading.
 ■A “firm” is an investment firm, subsidiary, or division held out to the public 
as a distinct business entity.
 ■A composite is an aggregation of one or more portfolios managed accord -
ing to a similar investment mandate, objective, or strategy. The compos -
ite return is the weighted average of the return of all portfolios in the 
composite.
 ■All discretionary, fee-paying, segregated accounts must be included in at 
least one composite. All discretionary, fee-paying pooled funds must be 
included in any composite for which they meet the composite definition. 
A portfolio is discretionary if the firm is able to implement the intended 
investment strategy.
 ■Firms must formulate, document, and adhere to composite- and pooled 
fund–specific policies for the treatment of external cash flows and to adhere 
to those policies consistently.
 ■The GIPS standards mandate the use of certain calculation methodologies 
to facilitate comparability of results among firms. Time-weighted returns are 
required for all portfolios except portfolios meeting certain criteria.
 ■Money-weighted returns may be presented instead of time-weighted returns 
if the firm has control over the external cash flows into the portfolios in the 
composite or the pooled fund and at least one of the following conditions 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 180
is met: the portfolios in the composite are (or the pooled fund is): 1) 
closed-end; 2) fixed life; 3) fixed commitment; or 4) have illiquid invest -
ments as a significant part of the investment strategy.
 ■Returns for periods of less than one year must not be annualized.
 ■Returns from cash and cash equivalents must be included in all total return 
calculations.
 ■Returns must be calculated after the deduction of transaction costs.
 ■Assets must be valued using a fair value methodology. If objective, observ -
able, unadjusted quoted market prices for identical investments in active 
markets on the measurement date are available, they must be used. If they 
are not available, firms may use, in this order: (1) quoted prices for similar 
investments in markets that are active; (2) quoted prices for identical or 
similar investments in markets that are not active; (3) market-based inputs, 
other than quoted prices, that are observable for the investment; or (4) sub -
jective, unobservable inputs.
 ■A firm must have a clear, written definition of discretion that is consistently 
applied.
 ■Firms may not link the theoretical performance of simulated or model port -
folios with actual performance.
 ■GIPS Composite Reports that present TWRs must include the following key 
items:
 ●at least five years of annual performance (unless the composite has been 
in existence for a shorter period), building to a minimum of 10 years of 
returns;
 ●composite and benchmark annual returns for all years;
 ●the number of portfolios (if six or more) in the composite at each period 
end;
 ●the amount of assets in the composite;
 ●the amount of total firm assets at the end of each period;
 ●a measure of internal dispersion of individual portfolio returns for each 
annual period and, where monthly returns are available; and
 ●the three-year annualized ex post  standard deviation of the composite 
and of the benchmark as of each annual period end.
 ■Performance from a past firm or affiliation may be linked to the per -
formance of the new or acquiring firm if (1) substantially all the invest -
ment decision makers are employed by the new or acquiring firm, (2) the 
decision-making process remains substantially intact and independent 
within the new or acquiring firm, (3) the new or acquiring firm has records 
that document and support the reported performance, and (4) there is no 
break in the track record between the past firm or affiliation and the new or 
acquiring firm.
 ■Verification provides assurance on whether the firm’s policies and proce -
dures related to composite and pooled fund maintenance, as well as the cal -
culation, presentation, and distribution of performance have been designed 
in compliance with the GIPS standards and have been implemented on a 
firm-wide basis.
 ■Verifiers must determine if the firm satisfies the GIPS standards require -
ments with respect to recordkeeping, policies and procedures, the definition 
of the firm, the completeness of the list of composites and limited distribu -
tion pooled fund descriptions, and the calculation of total firm assets.
Verification 181
 ■A verification report may be issued only with respect to the whole firm. 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 182
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Company C manages money for both retail and institutional clients. There are 
two autonomous groups within the company: “Company C Institutional Invest -
ment Management, ” which manages institutional assets, and “Company C Retail 
Investors, ” which manages retail assets. How should Company C define itself as a 
firm to comply with the GIPS standards?
2. Firm A is a multinational investment firm with offices around the world, in -
cluding Japan, Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Although 
all of its offices are part of the global parent firm, each office is registered with 
the appropriate national regulatory authority and each is held out to clients and 
prospective clients as a distinct business entity. Firm A (United States) claims 
compliance with the GIPS standards. Can the US entity claim compliance with 
the GIPS standards?
3. Which statement most accurately  expresses a requirement of the GIPS standards?
A. Non-fee-paying portfolios must not be included in composites.
B. All actual fee-paying discretionary segregated accounts must be included in 
at least one composite.
C. All actual fee-paying discretionary segregated accounts must be included in 
only one composite.
4. Use the information in the following table to answer this question (amounts in €):
Date Fair ValueExternal  
Cash FlowFair Value  
Post Cash Flow
31 December 2018 200,000    
31 January 2019 208,000    
16 February 2019 217,000 +40,000 257,000
28 February 2019 263,000    
22 March 2019 270,000 −30,000 240,000
31 March 2019 245,000    
Calculate the rate of return for this portfolio for January, February, March, and 
the first quarter of 2019 using revaluing for large cash flows methodology (as -
sume “large” is defined as greater than 5%).
5. The GIPS standards do not require firms to value portfolios in accordance with:
A. the definition of fair value.
B. composite-specific valuation policies.
C. generally accepted principles of financial accounting.
6. Convenable Capital Management manages an equity portfolio for the Flender 
Company. Cash held in the portfolio is invested by Flender’s existing custodial 
bank. Must Convenable include cash and cash equivalents in the portfolio return 
calculations?
A. Yes
Practice Problems 183
B. No, the cash is not invested by Convenable
C. No, Convenable does not have discretion over the selection of the custodian
7. Under the GIPS standards, the most  accurate statement is that transaction costs 
do not include:
A. spreads from internal brokers.
B. brokerage commissions.
C. custody fees charged per transaction.
The following information relates to questions 
8-10
A European equity composite contains three portfolios whose cash flow weight -
ing factors are as follows.
 Cash Flow  
Weighting FactorPortfolio (€ millions)
A B C
Fair value as of 31 July   74.9 127.6 110.4
External cash flows:        
   8 August 0.742   −15  
   12 August 0.613 7.5    
   19 August 0.387   −5 15
Fair value as of 31 August   85.3 109.8 128.4
8. Calculate the returns of Portfolio A, Portfolio B, and Portfolio C for the month of 
August using the Modified Dietz formula.
9. Calculate the August composite return by asset-weighting the individual portfo -
lio returns using beginning-of-period values.
10. Calculate the August composite return by asset-weighting the individual port -
folio returns using a method that reflects both beginning-of-period values and 
external cash flows.
11. Can a firm include a single portfolio in more than one of the firm’s composites?
12. In March 2016, Tan/Lim Asset Management, a GIPS-compliant firm, introduced 
a new technical analysis model that management believed would be a powerful 
tool in tactical asset allocation. After extensive backtesting, Tan/Lim began to 
use the model to manage actual “live” portfolios in June 2016, and managers 
constructed a composite composed of actual, fee-paying, discretionary portfo -
lios managed in accordance with the model. In 2019, after three very successful 
years of managing client funds in this way, management decided that because the 
actual performance of live portfolios validated the model’s performance, the firm 
should present the simulated performance of the model through the backtesting 
period to prospective clients. Tan/Lim proceeded to link the backtested returns 
to the actual performance of the composite and to present 3-, 5- and 10-year 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 184
performance as a continuous record in GIPS Reports. Does this practice comply 
with the GIPS standards?
13. Midwest National Bank manages a domestic equity portfolio for the Springfield 
Municipal Employees’ Retirement Fund (SMERF), a mature defined benefit 
pension plan. The SMERF portfolio is included in Midwest’s Institutional Equity 
composite. The composite description states, “Portfolios included in the Institu -
tional Equity composite are actively managed for long-term capital appreciation. ” 
SMERF’s investment policy statement includes the following provisions:
All security transactions must be approved in advance by the SMERF Investment 
Committee. SMERF anticipates making regular net withdrawals in substantial 
amounts from the portfolio to meet pension liabilities. SMERF staff will pre -
pare a schedule of withdrawals at the beginning of each fiscal year. The portfolio 
manager must manage liquidity so as to disburse funds in accordance with the 
withdrawal schedule.
In view of these restrictions, discuss whether Midwest National Bank can justify 
including the SMERF portfolio in the composite.
14. A fixed-income portfolio is most likely  to be considered non-discretionary if the 
client’s investment policy states that:
A. securities held at a gain must not be sold.
B. the average credit quality must be investment grade.
C. securities held in the portfolio must be issued in developed markets.
15. A charitable foundation transfers securities in kind to Taurus Asset Management 
Ltd. to fund a new bank loan portfolio. Taurus estimates that after liquidating 
the transferred securities, it will take five months to invest the foundation’s 
assets in bank loans. Which statement best describes a requirement of the GIPS 
standards? Taurus must include the foundation’s portfolio in the appropriate 
composite:
A. on a timely and consistent basis.
B. when the assets are substantially invested.
C. as of the beginning of the next full measurement period.
16. Ord Capital Management, an investment management firm that claims compli -
ance with the GIPS standards, manages a global equity portfolio for a pension 
plan sponsored by Chimie Bio-Industrielle. On 15 April, the plan sponsor notifies 
Ord that the firm will be terminated as of the end of the month and instructs the 
manager to stop trading immediately. Assuming Ord calculates composites using 
monthly portfolio returns, Ord must include the Chimie portfolio in the histori -
cal returns of the composite to which it belongs up to:
A. 31 March.
B. 15 April.
C. 30 April.
17. Southwest Capital Advisors LLC manages a fixed-income composite in accor -
dance with an enhanced indexing strategy that makes strategic use of high-yield 
and emerging market bonds in addition to investment grade bonds issued in de -
veloped markets. The Merrimack Company, a family office, has a portfolio that is 
Practice Problems 185
included in the firm’s fixed-income enhanced indexing composite. Merrimack in -
forms Southwest in writing that, because of changes in its investment policy, the 
portfolio can no longer hold high-yield or emerging market bonds. In accordance 
with the GIPS standards, Southwest decides to switch the Merrimack portfolio to 
another composite. The historical performance of the portfolio must be:
A. reflected in both composites.
B. switched to the new composite.
C. retained in the enhanced indexing composite.
The following information relates to questions 
18-20
Bamako Investment Management defines its core-plus fixed-income compos -
ite as containing all discretionary portfolios of more than $10 million that are 
invested in accordance with a strategy that includes domestic high-yield debt in 
addition to US government and agency securities and investment-grade bonds 
issued by US corporations. The composite benchmark is 75% Bloomberg Barclays 
Capital US Government/Credit Index and 25% Bloomberg Barclays Capital US 
High Yield Index, rebalanced monthly.
18. The core-plus fixed-income composite includes a portfolio managed on behalf 
of the Bida Academy endowment fund. The trustees of Bida inform Bamako in 
writing that because of a change in investment policy, the endowment fund is no 
longer permitted to hold below-investment-grade securities. Bamako determines 
that henceforth, the Bida portfolio should be included in the core fixed-income 
composite rather than the core-plus fixed-income composite. The historical 
record of the portfolio must be:
A. included in both composites.
B. kept in the core-plus fixed-income composite.
C. excluded from the core-plus fixed-income composite.
19. After an extended period of rising interest rates, the value of Bouwa Spe -
cial Equipment Company’s core-plus fixed-income portfolio falls below the 
composite minimum of $10 million. The Bouwa portfolio remains below the 
composite-specific minimum asset level for nine months, at which point the 
client makes an additional contribution that brings it back above $10 million in 
assets. During the nine months the portfolio is below the composite minimum 
asset level, Bamako must:
A. temporarily switch the Bouwa portfolio to the firm’s miscellaneous 
composite.
B. include the Bouwa portfolio in the core-plus fixed-income composite in all 
measurement periods.
C. exclude the Bouwa portfolio from the core-plus fixed-income composite for 
the period it was below the minimum asset level.
20. Mahe Manufacturing Company, a core-plus fixed-income client, informs Bama -
ko in writing that, in the future, all security transactions must be approved in 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 186
advance by Mahe’s controller. The most likely  consequence is that Bamako must 
prospectively exclude the Mahe portfolio from:
A. all composites.
B. total firm assets.
C. the core-plus fixed-income composite only.
21. What is the minimum number of portfolios that a composite must contain to 
comply with the GIPS standards? Must a firm disclose the number of portfolios 
in a composite?
22. Macondo Institutional Asset Management has been managing equi -
ty, fixed-income, and balanced accounts since 2007. The firm became 
GIPS-compliant on 1 January 2012 and has prepared GIPS Composite Reports 
using time-weighted returns for the 2007–2019 period. Fixed-income perfor -
mance was poor prior to 2015, when a new team of managers was brought on 
board. When Jorge Garcia joins Macondo as marketing director in June 2020, 
he suggests showing performance starting with calendar 2015, the first year that 
performance started to improve. He proposes to show composites with returns 
for the five calendar years 2015 through 2019. Does this course of action comply 
with the GIPS standards?
23. Dylan O’Connor is a portfolio manager at JEMStone Asset Management. He 
makes all the investment decisions for the portfolios in the firm’s Emerging 
Market composite, supported by JEMStone’s research department and trading 
desk. Acella Investment Advisors is seeking to establish an emerging market in -
vestment strategy and hires O’Connor to join Acella. Can Acella link O’Connor’s 
historical performance while at JEMStone to the performance of its new strategy 
and comply with the GIPS standards?
24. It is most  accurate to say that verification:
A. makes the claim of compliance more credible.
B. certifies that the firm has adequate internal controls.
C. ensures the accuracy of specific composite presentations.
25. Renner, Williams & Woods decides to have its equity and balanced composites 
verified. Because the firm has only a handful of fixed-income accounts and does 
not present fixed-income management results in marketing materials shown to 
prospects, management decides that it would be a waste of time and money to 
hire a verification firm to verify such a small composite. Is it possible for Renner, 
Williams & Woods to obtain a firm-wide verification that covers only the equity 
and balanced composites?
Solutions 187
SOLUTIONS
1. The GIPS standards encourage firms to adopt the broadest, most meaningful 
definition of a firm. Company C should consider defining itself to include the as -
sets managed by both the institutional entity and the retail entity for the purpos -
es of claiming compliance with the GIPS standards. Company C could define the 
two autonomous entities as separate firms, however, if each subsidiary is held out 
to clients and prospective clients as a distinct business unit.
2. Yes, the US entity is a distinct business entity and thus meets the definition of a 
firm under the GIPS standards.
3. B is correct. The GIPS standards require that all actual, fee-paying, discretion -
ary segregated accounts must be included in at least one composite. Although 
non-fee-paying discretionary accounts may be included in a composite (with 
appropriate disclosure), non-discretionary segregated accounts must not be 
included in a firm’s composites. 
4. January:
 RJan = (208,000 − 200,000)/200,000 = 4.00%
February:
 RFeb1-15  = (217,000 − 208,000)/208,000 = 4.33%
 RFeb16-28  = (263,000 − 257,000)/257,000 = 2.33%
 RFeb1-28  = [(1 + 0.0433) × (1 + 0.0233)] − 1 = 6.76%
March:
 RMar1-21  = (270,000 − 263,000)/263,000 = 2.66%
 RMar22-31  = (245,000 − 240,000)/240,000 = 2.08%
 RMar1-31  = [(1 + 0.0266) × (1 + 0.0208)] − 1 = 4.80%
Quarter 1:
 RQT1 = [(1 + 0.0400) × (1 + 0.0676) × (1 + 0.0480)] − 1 = 16.36 %
5. C is correct. The GIPS standards state that portfolios must be valued in accor -
dance with the definition of fair value, and that firms must value portfolios in 
accordance with the composite-specific valuation policy. The GIPS standards do 
not require firms to adhere to the principles of financial accounting.
6. A is correct. The GIPS standards state, “Returns from cash and cash equivalents 
must be included in all return calculations, even if the firm does not control the 
specific cash investment(s). ” 
7. C is correct. The GIPS Glossary defines transaction costs as “the costs of buying 
or selling investments” and states, “These costs typically take the form of bro -
kerage commissions, exchange fees and/or taxes, and/or bid–offer spreads from 
either internal or external brokers. Custodial fees charged per transaction should 
be considered custody fees and not transaction costs. ”
8. Portfolio returns:
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 188
   r  A   =   85.3 − 74.9 − 7.5  _______________   74.9 +    (  7.5 × 0.613  )       =   2.9 _ 79.5   = 0.0365  = 3.65% 
   r  B   =   109.8  − 127.6  −    (  − 15 )     −    (  − 5 )       ____________________________    127.6  +    (  − 15 × 0.742  )     +    (  − 5 × 0.387  )       =   2.2 _ 114.535   = 0.0192  = 1.92% 
   r  C   =   128.4  − 110.4  − 15  _______________   110.4  +    (  15 × 0.387  )       =   3 _ 116.205   = 0.0258  = 2.58% 
9. To calculate the composite return based on beginning assets, first determine the 
percentage of beginning composite assets represented by each portfolio; then 
determine the weighted-average return for the month:
 Beginning composite assets = 74.9 + 127.6 + 110.4 = 312.9
 Portfolio A = 74.9/312.9 = 0.239 = 23.9%
 Portfolio B = 127.6/312.9 = 0.408 = 40.8%
 Portfolio C = 110.4/312.9 = 0.353 = 35.3%
 rComp  = (0.0365 × 0.239) + (0.0192 × 0.408) + (0.0258 × 0.353)
  = 0.0257 = 2.57%
10. To calculate the composite return based on beginning assets plus cash flows, first 
use the denominator of the Modified Dietz formula to determine the percentage 
of total beginning assets plus weighted cash flows represented by each portfolio, 
and then calculate the weighted-average return:
 Beginning composite assets + Weighted cash flows = [74.9 + (7.5 × 0.613)] + 
[127.6 + (−15 × 0.742) + (−5 × 0.387)] + [110.4 + (15 × 0.387)] = 79.5 + 114.535 
+ 116.205 
 = 310.24
 Portfolio A = 79.5/310.24 = 0.256 = 25.6%
 Portfolio B = 114.535/310.24 = 0.369 = 36.9%
 Portfolio C = 116.205/310.24 = 0.375 = 37.5%
 rComp  = (0.0365 × 0.256) + (0.0192 × 0.369) + (0.0258 × 0.375)
  = 0.0261 = 2.61%
The Aggregate Return method is calculated by summing beginning assets and 
intra-period external cash flows, treating the entire composite as though it were 
a single portfolio and then computing the return directly with the Modified Dietz 
formula.
    r  Comp    =   323.5  − 312.9  −    (  − 15 + 7.5 + 10 )        _____________________________________     312.9  +    [     (  − 15 )     × 0.742  + 7.5 × 0.613  + 10 × 0.387  ]            
= 0.0261  = 2.61%   
11. Yes. The GIPS standards state that firms must include all actual, discretionary, 
fee-paying segregated accounts in at least one of the firm’s composites. If the seg -
regated account meets the defined criteria for inclusion in more than one com -
posite, the firm must include the account in all the firm’s appropriate composites. 
For example, a firm may have a large-cap composite and a large-cap growth 
composite. If the firm manages a segregated account that meets the criteria for 
inclusion in the large-cap composite as well as the large-cap growth composite, 
Solutions 189
the firm must include the account in both composites.
12. No, Tan/Lim may not claim compliance with the GIPS standards if model perfor -
mance is linked to actual performance. The GIPS standards state that composites 
must include only actual assets under management within the defined firm, and 
they expressly prohibit linking the performance of simulated or model portfolios 
with actual performance.
13. The GIPS standards prohibit including non-discretionary portfolios in compos -
ites. IPS restrictions do not necessarily render a portfolio non-discretionary. It 
is up to the investment management firm to define discretion and to determine 
whether it has the discretion to implement the investment strategy, given the 
restrictions of the IPS. In this case, however, it appears likely that SMERF’s policy 
requiring transactions to be approved in advance by the Investment Committee 
and the pension plan’s liquidity needs prevent Midwest National Bank from fully 
implementing the investment objective of achieving long-term capital apprecia -
tion through active management. If so, Midwest National Bank must classify the 
SMERF portfolio as non-discretionary and exclude it from all composites.
14. A is correct. Such a restriction would most likely lead to the composition of 
this portfolio differing materially from other fixed-income portfolios run by 
the firm and, as such, the manager could reasonably classify this portfolio as 
non-discretionary. The restrictions stated in answers B and C are constraints that 
are likely to be specified as part of a fixed-income strategy.
15. A is correct. The GIPS standards state, “Composites must include new portfolios 
on a timely and consistent basis after each portfolio comes under management. ” 
In this case, it is expected to take an extended period to invest the new client’s 
assets in accordance with the composite strategy. Assuming Taurus complies 
with the GIPS standards, its documented policy would provide for the inclusion 
of new bank loan portfolios in the composite on a timely basis. For example, Tau -
rus’s policy may require new portfolios to be included in the composite as of the 
first full measurement period that the assets are fully invested. Taurus must apply 
its policy consistently.
16. A is correct. Terminated portfolios must be included in the historical perfor -
mance of the composite through the last full measurement during which the 
firm had discretion. The last full measurement period during which the Chimie 
Bio-Industrielle portfolio was under the management of Ord Capital Manage -
ment was the month of March.
17. C is correct. The portfolio’s historical performance must remain with the origi -
nal composite. Portfolios must not be switched from one composite to another 
unless either documented changes to a portfolio’s investment mandate, objective, 
or strategy or the redefinition of the composite make it appropriate. 
18. B is correct. The portfolio’s historical performance must remain with the origi -
nal composite. Portfolios must not be switched from one composite to another 
unless either documented changes to a portfolio’s investment mandate, objective, 
or strategy or the redefinition of the composite make it appropriate.
19. C is correct. The GIPS standards state, “If the firm sets a minimum asset level 
for portfolios to be included in a composite, the firm must not include portfolios 
below the minimum asset level in that composite. ” However, a firm may set one 
minimum asset level at which to add a portfolio to a composite and another level 
at which a portfolio must be removed from a composite. Unless Bamako’s poli -
cies specify different minimum asset levels for adding and removing portfolios 
Learning Module 3 Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards 190
from composites, Bamako must remove the Bouwa portfolio from the core-plus 
fixed-income composite when the portfolio’s assets fall below the minimum 
and return it to the composite when it once again qualifies for inclusion. A is 
incorrect because composites must be defined according to similar investment 
mandates, objectives, and/or strategies; there should be no “miscellaneous” 
composite.
20. A is correct. The client’s prior approval authority for security transactions 
most likely renders the portfolio non-discretionary. The GIPS standards state 
“non-discretionary portfolios must not be included in composites. ” B is incorrect 
because total firm assets must include all discretionary and non-discretionary 
assets managed by the firm.
21. Under the GIPS standards, there is no minimum or maximum number of portfo -
lios that a composite may include. The GIPS standards require that firms disclose 
the number of portfolios in each composite as of the end of each annual period 
presented, unless there are five or fewer portfolios. 
22. The GIPS standards require that when a firm initially claims compliance with 
the GIPS standards, it must present at least five years of GIPS-compliant perfor -
mance (or for the period since the composite inception date if the composite has 
been in existence less than five years). After presenting a minimum of five years 
of GIPS-compliant performance (or for the period since the composite inception 
date if the composite has been in existence less than five years), the firm must 
present an additional year of performance each year, building up to a minimum 
of 10 years of GIPS-compliant performance. In 2020, Macondo must present 
performance from 2010 through 2019. Macondo Institutional Asset Management 
thus cannot drop the years prior to 2015 at the time Garcia suggests it do so. In 
addition to violating a specific requirement, Garcia’s suggestion was not in the 
spirit of fair representation and full disclosure of performance. The firm may 
eliminate returns from more than 10 years ago from its GIPS Report, as long as it 
continues to show at least the most recent 10 years. It is recommended, however, 
that Macondo show its entire GIPS-compliant performance record.
23. Acella must determine if O’Connor’s performance track record meets all of the 
portability requirements. Acella must have records supporting the performance 
of portfolios currently in the composite and those that were previously managed 
to the strategy but have since terminated. The firm must also be comfortable that 
Mr. O’Connor was the primary decision maker for the strategy while at JEM -
Stone and that the strategy will remain substantially intact and independent once 
at Acella. If these requirements are met, Acella may port the track record, but the 
ported composite must pass one more test if the firm wishes to link performance: 
There must not be a break in the track record between the past firm and Acella. 
For example, if O’Connor left his prior firm at the end of February 2019 and did 
not start with Acella until 1 May 2019, there will be a break in the track record 
and Acella must not link to the prior performance. 
24. A is correct. Verification brings additional credibility to the claim of compliance, 
but it “does not provide assurance on the accuracy of any specific performance 
report. ” Verification also does not provide assurance on the adequacy of a firm’s 
internal controls.
25. No, a firm may not choose to have only a portion of the firm verified. A firm that 
has been verified may choose to have a detailed performance examination  con-
ducted on one or more specific composites, but verification cannot be carried out 
on only select composites, pooled funds, or portfolios. Firms must not state that 
a particular composite has been “verified. ”
