PORTFOLIO 
CONSTRUCTION
CFA® Program Curriculum
2025 • LEVEL III CORE • VOLUME 2
©2024 by CFA Institute. All rights reserved. This copyright covers material written 
expressly for this volume by the editor/s as well as the compilation itself. It does 
not cover the individual selections herein that first appeared elsewhere. Permission 
to reprint these has been obtained by CFA Institute for this edition only. Further 
reproductions by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and 
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems, must be arranged with 
the individual copyright holders noted.
CFA®, Chartered Financial Analyst®, AIMR-PPS®, and GIPS® are just a few of the 
trademarks owned by CFA Institute. To view a list of CFA Institute trademarks and the 
Guide for Use of CFA Institute Marks, please visit our website at www  .cfainstitute .org.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information 
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the 
publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. 
If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent pro -
fessional should be sought.
All trademarks, service marks, registered trademarks, and registered service marks 
are the property of their respective owners and are used herein for identification 
purposes only.
ISBN 978-1-961409-43-9 (paper)
ISBN 978-1-961409-55-2 (ebook)
May 2024
CONTENTS
How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum   ix
CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem (LES)   ix
Designing Your Personal Study Program   ix
Errata   x
Other Feedback   x
Portfolio Construction
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management   3
Introduction    3
The Roles of Equities in a Portfolio   4
Capital Appreciation   4
Dividend Income   5
Diversification with Other Asset Classes   5
Hedge against Inflation   6
Client Considerations for Equities in a Portfolio   7
Equity Investment Universe   10
Segmentation by Size and Style   10
Segmentation by Geography   11
Segmentation by Economic Activity   13
Segmentation of Equity Indexes and Benchmarks   14
Income Associated with Owning and Managing an Equity Portfolio   15
Dividend Income   15
Securities Lending Income   15
Ancillary Investment Strategies   16
Costs Associated with Owning and Managing an Equity Portfolio   17
Management Fees   17
Performance Fees   17
Administration Fees   18
Marketing and Distribution Costs   18
Trading Costs   19
Investment Approaches and Effects on Costs   19
Shareholder Engagement   20
Benefits of Shareholder Engagement   20
Disadvantages of Shareholder Engagement   21
The Role of an Equity Manager in Shareholder Engagement   21
Equity Investment across the Active Management Spectrum   23
Confidence to Outperform   23
Client Preference   23
Suitable Benchmark   24
Client-Specific Mandates   25
Risks/Costs of Active Management   25
Taxes   25
Advantages of Index-Based Equity Strategies    26
iv Contents
Benchmark Selection   26
Indexes for Index-Based Strategies    26
Considerations When Choosing a Benchmark Index   28
Index Construction Methodologies   30
Summary   35
References   37
Practice Problems   38
Solutions   42
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management   45
Introduction   45
Roles of Fixed-Income Securities in Portfolios   46
Diversification Benefits   46
Benefits of Regular Cash Flows   49
Inflation-Hedging Potential   49
Classifying Fixed-Income Mandates   51
Liability-Based Mandates   51
Total Return Mandates   52
Fixed-Income Mandates with ESG Considerations   53
Fixed-Income Portfolio Measures   55
Portfolio Measures of Risk and Return   57
Correlations between Fixed-Income Sectors   58
Use of Measures of Risk and Return in Portfolio Management   59
Bond Market Liquidity   60
Liquidity among Bond Market Sub-Sectors   61
The Effects of Liquidity on Fixed-Income Portfolio Management   62
A Model for Fixed-Income Returns   65
Decomposing Expected Returns   66
Estimation of the Inputs   70
Limitations of the Expected Return Decomposition   70
Leverage   71
Using Leverage   72
Methods for Leveraging Fixed-Income Portfolios   72
Risks of Leverage   75
Fixed-Income Portfolio Taxation   77
Principles of Fixed-Income Taxation   77
Investment Vehicles and Taxes   78
Liability-Driven Investing     80
Liability-Driven Investing vs. Asset-Driven Liabilities     80
Types of Liabilities     81
Managing the Interest Rate Risk of Multiple Liabilities     83
Cash Flow Matching     83
Laddered Portfolios     86
Benefits of Using Laddered Portfolios     87
Using ETFs to Build Laddered Portfolios     88
Summary    89
References   93
Practice Problems   94
v Contents
Solutions   100
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments   103
Introduction   103
The Role of Alternative Investments in a Multi-Asset Portfolio   104
Diversifying Equity Risk   110
Volatility Reduction over the Short Time Horizon   110
Risk of Not Meeting the Investment Goals over the Long Time 
Horizon   113
Traditional Approaches to Asset Classification   116
Traditional Approaches to Asset Classification   116
Risk-Based Approaches to Asset Classification   119
Illustration: Asset Allocation and Risk-Based Approaches   123
Comparing Risk-Based and Traditional Approaches   124
Risk Considerations, Return Expectations, and Investment Vehicle   126
Risk Considerations   126
Return Expectations   127
Investment Vehicle   128
Liquidity   130
Liquidity Risks Associated with the Investment Vehicle   130
Liquidity Risks Associated with the Underlying Investments   132
Fees and Expenses, Tax Considerations, and Other Considerations   133
Tax Considerations   134
Other Considerations   134
Suitability Considerations   137
Investment Horizon   137
Expertise   138
Governance   138
Transparency   138
Asset Allocation Approaches and Statistical Properties and Challenges   141
Statistical Properties and Challenges of Asset Returns   142
Monte Carlo Simulation   146
Simulating Skewed and Fat-Tailed Financial Variables   147
Simulation for Long-Term Horizon Risk Assessment   149
Portfolio Optimization   153
Mean–Variance Optimization without and with Constraints   154
Mean–CVaR Optimization   156
Risk Factor-Based Optimization   160
Liquidity Planning   164
Achieving and Maintaining the Strategic Asset Allocation   165
Preparing for the Unexpected   170
Preparing for the Unexpected   170
Monitoring the Investment Program   174
Overall Investment Program Monitoring   174
Performance Evaluation   175
Monitoring the Firm and the Investment Process   177
Summary   179
References   182
vi Contents
Practice Problems   183
Solutions   192
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management   199
Introduction   199
Wealth in a Global Context   202
Defining Wealth   202
Sources of Global Wealth   207
Distribution of Global Wealth   219
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital   229
The Wealth Life Cycle   231
The Economic Value of the Individual   234
Individual Investors: Return, Risk, and Other Objectives and Constraints   244
Nominal and Inflation-Adjusted Returns   244
Risks   245
Objectives   248
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation   252
Taxes on Investment Income   253
The Impact of Accrual Taxes on Investment Returns   256
The Impact of Deferral of Taxes on Investment Returns   258
The Impact of Basis on Capital Gains   261
Inflation   262
The Impact of Different Tax Rates, Sources of Return, and Inflation   265
Comparing Nominal and After-Tax Nominal with Real and After-Tax 
Real Returns   268
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements   272
Parts of an IPS   274
Sample Investment Policy Statement   281
Practice Problems   287
Solutions   292
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors   297
Institutional Investors: Types and Common Characteristics   298
Institutional Investors: Common Characteristics   299
Overview of Investment Policy   303
Pension Funds: Types and Stakeholders   306
Stakeholders   308
Pension Funds: Liabilities, Investment Horizon, and Liquidity Needs   310
Liabilities and Investment Horizon   310
Liquidity Needs   314
Pension Funds: External Constraints   316
Legal and Regulatory Constraints   316
Tax and Accounting Constraints   317
Pension Funds: Risk Considerations   318
Pension Funds: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation   322
Investment Objectives   322
Asset Allocation by Pension Plans   324
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Types and Stakeholders   328
vii Contents
Stakeholders   330
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Other Considerations   330
Liabilities and Investment Horizons   330
Liquidity Needs   332
External Constraints Affecting Investment   333
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation   334
Investment Objectives   334
Asset Allocation by Sovereign Wealth Funds   336
University Endowments and Private Foundations   338
External Constraints Affecting Investment   340
University Endowments: Other Considerations   341
University Endowments—Liabilities and Investment Horizon   342
University Endowments—Liquidity Needs   343
Private Foundations   344
Private Foundations—Liabilities and Investment Horizon   344
Private Foundations—Liquidity Needs   346
University Endowments: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation   347
University Endowments   347
Asset Allocation   351
Private Foundations: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation   355
Private Foundations   357
Banks and Insurers   359
External Constraints Affecting Investment   361
Banks: Other Considerations   364
Banks—Liabilities and Investment Horizon   364
Banks—Liquidity Needs   366
Insurers   367
Insurers—Liabilities and Investment Horizon   368
Insurers—Liquidity Needs   370
Banks and Insurers: Investment Objectives   370
Banks   371
Insurers   371
Banks and Insurers: Balance Sheet Management and Investment 
Considerations   374
Banks and Insurers: Investment Strategies and Asset and Liability Volatility   381
Banks and Insurers: Implementation of Portfolio Decisions   386
Summary   392
References   396
Practice Problems   397
Solutions   404
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets   411
Costs of Trading   412
Costs of Trading   412
Effective Spreads and Volume-Weighted Cost Estimates   415
Implementation Shortfall   416
VWAP Transaction Cost Estimates   417
Development of Electronic Markets   419
viii Contents
Electronic Trading   419
Advantages of Electronic Trading Systems   420
Electronification of Bond Markets   420
Market Fragmentation   421
Effects on Transaction Costs   422
Types of Electronic Traders   422
The Major Types of Electronic Traders   423
Electronic Trading System: Characteristics and Uses   425
Why Speed Matters   426
Fast Communications   427
Fast Computations   428
Advanced Orders, Tactics, and Algorithms   429
Select Examples of How Electronic Trading Changed Trading 
Strategies   432
Electronic Trading Risks   434
The HFT Arms Race   435
Systemic Risks of Electronic Trading   435
Detecting Abusive Trading Practices   440
Front running.   440
Market manipulation.   440
Summary   443
Practice Problems   445
Solutions   450
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF)   455
Introduction   455
Financial Risks Faced by Institutional Investors   456
Long-Term Perspective   456
Dimensions of Financial Risk Management   457
Risk Considerations for Long-Term Investors   459
Risks Associated with Illiquid Asset Classes   461
Managing Liquidity Risk   465
Enterprise Risk Management for Institutional Investors   466
Environmental and Social Risks Faced by Institutional Investors   468
Universal Ownership, Externalities, and Responsible Investing   469
Material Environmental Issues for an Institutional Investor   470
Material Social Issues for an Institutional Investor   475
Case Study   477
Case Study: Introduction   477
Case Study: Background   478
R-SWF’S Investments: 1.0   478
Investment Committee Meeting 1.0   484
R-SWF’S Investments: 2.0   496
Investment Committee Meeting 2.0   501
R-SWF’S Investments: 3.0   510
References   512
Glossary   G-1
ix
How to Use the CFA 
Program Curriculum
The CFA® Program exams measure your mastery of the core knowledge, skills, and 
abilities required to succeed as an investment professional. These core competencies 
are the basis for the Candidate Body of Knowledge (CBOK™). The CBOK consists of 
four components:
A broad outline that lists the major CFA Program topic areas ( www  
.cfainstitute  .org/  programs/  cfa/ curriculum/  cbok/  cbok )
Topic area weights that indicate the relative exam weightings of the top-level 
topic areas ( www  .cfainstitute  .org/  en/ programs/  cfa/ curriculum )
Learning outcome statements (LOS) that advise candidates about the 
specific knowledge, skills, and abilities they should acquire from curricu -
lum content covering a topic area: LOS are provided at the beginning of 
each block of related content and the specific lesson that covers them. We 
encourage you to review the information about the LOS on our website 
(www  .cfainstitute  .org/  programs/  cfa/ curriculum/  study  -sessions ), including 
the descriptions of LOS “command words” on the candidate resources page 
at www  .cfainstitute  .org/ -/ media/  documents/  support/  programs/  cfa -and 
-cipm  -los -command  -words  .ashx .
The CFA Program curriculum that candidates receive access to upon exam 
registration
Therefore, the key to your success on the CFA exams is studying and understanding 
the CBOK. You can learn more about the CBOK on our website: www  .cfainstitute  
.org/  programs/  cfa/ curriculum/  cbok . 
The curriculum, including the practice questions, is the basis for all exam questions. 
The curriculum is selected or developed specifically to provide candidates with the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities reflected in the CBOK.
CFA INSTITUTE LEARNING ECOSYSTEM (LES)
Your exam registration fee includes access to the CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem 
(LES). This digital learning platform provides access, even offline, to all the curriculum 
content and practice questions. The LES is organized as a series of learning modules 
consisting of short online lessons and associated practice questions. This tool is your 
source for all study materials, including practice questions and mock exams. The LES 
is the primary method by which CFA Institute delivers your curriculum experience. 
Here, candidates will find additional practice questions to test their knowledge. Some 
questions in the LES provide a unique interactive experience.
DESIGNING YOUR PERSONAL STUDY PROGRAM
An orderly, systematic approach to exam preparation is critical. You should dedicate 
a consistent block of time every week to reading and studying. Review the LOS both 
before and after you study curriculum content to ensure you can demonstrate the 
How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum x
knowledge, skills, and abilities described by the LOS and the assigned reading. Use 
the LOS as a self-check to track your progress and highlight areas of weakness for 
later review.
Successful candidates report an average of more than 300 hours preparing for each 
exam. Your preparation time will vary based on your prior education and experience, 
and you will likely spend more time on some topics than on others. 
ERRATA
The curriculum development process is rigorous and involves multiple rounds of 
reviews by content experts. Despite our efforts to produce a curriculum that is free of 
errors, in some instances, we must make corrections. Curriculum errata are periodically 
updated and posted by exam level and test date on the Curriculum Errata webpage 
(www  .cfainstitute  .org/  en/ programs/  submit  -errata ). If you believe you have found an 
error in the curriculum, you can submit your concerns through our curriculum errata 
reporting process found at the bottom of the Curriculum Errata webpage. 
OTHER FEEDBACK
Please send any comments or suggestions to info@ cfainstitute .org, and we will review 
your feedback thoughtfully. 
Portfolio Construction

Overview of Equity Portfolio Management
by James Clunie, PhD, CFA, and James Alan Finnegan, CAIA, RMA, CFA.
James Clunie, PhD, CFA, is at Jupiter Asset Management (United Kingdom). James Alan 
Finnegan, CAIA, RMA, CFA (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
describe the roles of equities in the overall portfolio 
describe how an equity manager’s investment universe can be 
segmented
describe the types of income and costs associated with owning and 
managing an equity portfolio and their potential effects on portfolio 
performance
describe the potential benefits of shareholder engagement and the 
role an equity manager might play in shareholder engagement
describe rationales for equity investment across the active 
management spectrum
discuss considerations in choosing a benchmark for an equity 
portfolio
INTRODUCTION 
Equities represent a sizable portion of the global investment universe and are often 
a primary component of investors’ portfolios. Rationales for investing in equities 
include potential participation in the growth and earnings prospects of an economy’s 
corporate sector as well as an ownership interest in a range of business entities by 
size, economic activity, and geographical scope. Publicly traded equities are generally 
more liquid than other asset classes and thus enable investors to easily monitor price 
trends and trade securities at low costs.
This reading provides an overview of equity portfolio management. In the next 
section, we discuss the roles of equities in a portfolio. Then, we examine the equity 
investment universe, including several ways investors segment that universe. We 
will also cover the income and costs for an equity portfolio, as well as shareholder 
engagement between equity investors and investee companies. In addition, we will 1LEARNING MODULE
1
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 4
discuss equity investment across the active management spectrum and considerations 
for benchmark selection for equity strategies, including for index-based strategies. A 
summary of key points completes the learning module.
THE ROLES OF EQUITIES IN A PORTFOLIO
describe the roles of equities in the overall portfolio 
Equities play several roles in an overall portfolio, including providing such benefits 
as capital appreciation, dividend income, diversification with other asset classes, and 
a potential hedge against inflation. In addition to these benefits, client investment 
considerations play an important role for portfolio managers when deciding to include 
equities in portfolios.
Capital Appreciation
Long-term returns on equities, driven predominantly by capital appreciation, have 
historically been among the highest among major asset classes. Exhibit 1  shows 
geometric, annualized real returns on equities, bonds, and bills—both globally and 
in various regions—from 1900 to 2022. Equities outperformed both bonds and bills 
during this period across the world. 
Exhibit 1: Real Returns on Equities, Bonds, and Bills (1900–2022)
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–7.8
AUT ITA BEL DEU FRA ESP PRT EMG JPN EUR NOR IRLWXU CHE NLD WLD DEV GBR FINCAN DNK SWE NZL USA AUS ZAF4.55.26.6
Equities Bonds Bills
Source : Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook 2023, Summary Edition.
Equities tend to outperform other asset classes during periods of strong economic 
growth, and they tend to underperform other asset classes during weaker economic 
periods. Capital (or price) appreciation of equities often occurs when investing 
in companies with growth in earnings, cash flows, and/or revenues—as well as in 
companies with competitive success. Capital appreciation can occur, for example, in 
growth-oriented companies, such as small technology companies, as well as in large, 
mature companies where management successfully maintains profitability.2
The Roles of Equities in a Portfolio 5
Dividend Income
The most common source of income for an equity portfolio is dividends. Companies 
may choose to distribute free cash flows as dividends rather than reinvest in projects, 
particularly when suitable projects do not exist or do not have returns greater than 
investors’ required rate of return. Large, well-established corporations often provide 
dividend payments that increase in value over time, although there are no assurances 
that dividend payments from these corporations will grow or even be maintained. In 
addition to dividends on common stock (common dividends), preferred dividends can 
provide dividend income to those shareholders owning preferred shares.
Dividends have represented a significant component of long-term total returns 
for equity investors. Over shorter periods of time, however, the proportion of equity 
returns from dividends (reflected as dividend yield) can vary considerably relative to 
capital gains or losses. Exhibit 2  illustrates this effect of dividend returns relative to 
annual total returns on the S&P 500 Index from 1930 through 2021. Since 1990, the 
dividend yield on the S&P 500 has been in the 1%–3% range; thus, the effect of divi -
dends can clearly be significant during periods of weak equity market performance, 
such as during the first decade of the 21st century, when price returns were negative. 
Also note that the dividend yield may vary considerably by sector.
Exhibit 2:  S&P 500 Dividend Contribution (1930–2022)
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s41%17%16%
28%
73%44%30%
67%
NA*
1930–
2020Average
for All
Decades
S&P 500 Index Dividend Contribution to Total Return
S&P 500 Index Price Only (No Dividends)Average Annual Total Return
Sources : Morningstar and Hartford Funds.
Diversification with Other Asset Classes
Individual equities have unique characteristics, although the correlation of returns 
among equities is often high. In a portfolio context, however, equities can provide 
meaningful diversification benefits when combined with other asset classes (assuming 
less-than-perfect correlation). Recall that a major reason why portfolios can effectively 
reduce risk (typically expressed as standard deviation of returns) is that combining 
securities whose returns are less than perfectly correlated reduces the standard devia -
tion of the diversified portfolio below the weighted average of the standard deviations 
of the individual investments. The challenge in diversifying risk is to find assets that 
have a correlation much lower than +1.0.
Exhibit 3  provides a correlation matrix across various global equity indexes and 
other asset classes using total monthly returns for the 20 years ended 31 October 2021. 
The correlation matrix shows that during this period, various broad equity indexes 
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 6
and, to a lesser extent, country equity indexes were highly correlated with each other. 
Conversely, both the broad and country equity indexes were considerably less correlated 
with indexes in other asset classes, notably Treasury bonds, investment-grade bonds, 
and gold. Overall, Exhibit 3  indicates that combining equities with other asset classes 
can result in portfolio diversification benefits.
It is important to note that correlations are not constant over time. During a long 
historical period, the correlation of returns between two asset classes may be low, 
but in any given period, the correlation can differ from the long term. Correlation 
estimates can vary based on the capital market dynamics during the period when 
the correlations are measured. During periods of market crisis, correlations across 
asset classes and among equities themselves often increase and reduce the benefit 
of diversification. As with correlations, volatility (standard deviation) of asset class 
returns may also vary over time.
Exhibit 3: Correlation Matrix, 20 Y ears Ended 31 October 2021
1
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.000.84
0.96 0.86
0.97 0.87
0.66 0.84 0.69 0.58
0.46 0.50 0.74 0.91 0.70 0.84
–0.02 –0.01 –0.01
–0.32
–0.07 –0.22
–0.12–0.29 –0.23 –0.19 –0.39 –0.30 –0.26 –0.36–0.06 0.06 0.03 0.04 0.040.87 0.53 0.52 0.78 0.92 0.75 0.88
0.33
0.70
0.45 0.48 0.48 0.38 0.39 0.35 0.41 0.54 0.280.73 0.74 0.61 0.55 0.51 0.69 0.69 0.47
0.44
0.40 0.30 0.52
0.35 0.23 0.60 0.49 0.39 0.69 0.65 0.58 0.69 0.590.37 0.14 0.10 0.11 0.24 0.05 0.16 0.29 0.12 0.23
0.13 0.25 0.600.66 0.020.40 0.43 0.22 0.34 0.29 0.40 0.38
0.43 0.760.570.48 0.72 0.83 0.70 0.790.761 MSCI World NR USD
2 MSCI EM IMI NR USD
3 MSCI EAFE NR USD
4 S&P 500 TR USD
5 MSCI China NR LCL
6 MSCI Japan NR JPY
7 EURO STOXX 50 NR EUR
8 FTSE 100 TR GBP
13 S&P GSCI TR USD
14 S&P GSCI Gold TR
15 FTSE Nareit All Equity REITs TR USD9 Bloomberg US Agg Bond TR USD
10 Bloomberg Gbl Agg Ex USD TR USD
11 Bloomberg Treasury 1–5 Yr TR USD
12 Bloomberg Gbl HY Bond Composite TR USD23 45 67 89 10 11 12 13 14 15
0.01 to 0.25
0.00 to –0.240.26 to 0.50
–0.25 to –0.490.51 to 0.75
–0.50 to –0.740.76 to 1.00
–0.75 to –1.00
Source : Morningstar Direct.
Hedge against Inflation
Some individual equities or sectors can provide some protection against inflation, 
although the ability to do so varies. For example, certain companies may be success -
ful at passing along higher input costs (such as raw materials, energy, or wages) to 
customers. This ability to pass along costs to customers can protect a company’s or 
industry’s profit margin and cash flow and can be reflected in its stock prices. As 
another example, companies in sectors that produce broad-based commodities (e.g., 
oil or industrial metals producers) can more directly benefit from increases in com -
modity prices. Although individual equities or sectors can protect against inflation, 
the success of equities as an asset class in hedging inflation has been mixed. Certain 
empirical studies have shown that real returns on equities and inflation have positive 
correlation over the long term, but the degree of correlation typically varies by country 
and is dependent on the time period assessed. For severe inflationary periods, such 
as periods with an annual inflation rate over 5%, studies have shown that real returns 
on equities and inflation have been negatively  correlated. Therefore, the asset class’s 
efficacy as an inflation hedge may fail when it is most needed. 
The Roles of Equities in a Portfolio 7
Client Considerations for Equities in a Portfolio
The inclusion of equities in a client’s portfolio is driven by their goals and needs. A 
client’s investment considerations are typically described in an investment policy state -
ment (IPS), which establishes, among other things, return objectives, risk tolerance, 
constraints, and unique circumstances. By understanding these client considerations, 
a financial adviser or wealth manager can determine whether—and what amount 
of—equities should be in a client’s portfolio.
Equity investments are often characterized by such attributes as growth potential, 
income generation, risk and return volatility, and sensitivity to various macroeconomic 
variables (e.g., GDP growth, interest rates, and inflation). As a result, a portfolio 
manager can adapt such specific factors to an equity investor’s investment goals and 
risk tolerance. For example, a risk-averse and conservative investor may prefer some 
exposure to well-established companies with strong and stable cash flow that pay 
meaningful dividends. Conversely, a growth-oriented investor with an aggressive risk 
tolerance may prefer smaller companies with greater growth potential.
Wealth managers and financial advisers often consider the following investment 
objectives and constraints when deciding to include equities (or asset classes in gen -
eral, for that matter) in a client’s portfolio:
 ■Risk objective  addresses how risk is measured (e.g., in absolute or relative 
terms); the investor’s willingness to take risk; the investor’s ability to take 
risk; and the investor’s specific risk objectives.
 ■Return objective  addresses how returns are measured (e.g., in absolute or 
relative terms); this term refers to stated return objectives.
 ■Liquidity requirement  is a constraint in which cash is needed for anticipated 
or unanticipated events.
 ■Time horizon  is the time period associated with an investment objective 
(e.g., short term, long term, or some combination of the two).
 ■Tax concerns  include tax policies that can affect investor returns; for exam -
ple, dividends may be taxed at a different rate than capital gains.
 ■Legal and regulatory factors  are external factors imposed by governmental, 
regulatory, or oversight authorities.
 ■Unique circumstances  are an investor’s considerations other than liquidity 
requirements, time horizon, or tax concerns that may constrain portfolio 
choices. These considerations may include environmental, social, and gover -
nance (ESG) issues or religious preferences.
Clients’ interest in ESG and sustainable investing has grown. With regard to equities, 
these considerations often determine the suitability of certain sectors or individual 
company stocks for designated investor portfolios. Historically, ESG approaches used 
by portfolio managers have largely represented negative screening  (or exclusionary 
screening) and positive screening  or best-in-class  approaches. Negative screening 
refers to the practice of excluding certain sectors or companies that deviate from 
accepted standards in such areas as human rights or environmental concerns. Positive 
screening attempts to identify companies or sectors that score most favorably with 
regard to ESG-related risks and/or opportunities. For example, a negative screening 
approach may involve excluding oil and gas producers from consideration for a client’s 
portfolio strategy, while a positive screening approach may overweight companies 
and industries with strong governance practices, such as an independent board chair. 
Rather than screening, however, as of 2020, the largest sustainable investment strategy 
globally was ESG integration, which is the inclusion of ESG considerations in financial 
analysis and investment decisions ( GSIA 2020 ).
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 8
The goals of ESG integration are to reduce financial risks and/or enhance financial 
returns by identifying and valuing risks or opportunities that are not typically iden -
tified and valued. ESG integration begins with identifying relevant ESG information 
for sector, industry, and company research and evaluating its financial materiality. 
Financially material ESG information is then used alongside traditional financial 
information to inform an analyst’s valuation and recommendation to buy, hold, or 
sell a security. Just as with traditional equity analysis, a variety of tools and methods 
exist for integrating ESG information into the analytical process, and analysts must 
choose the ones they believe are most appropriate for their analysis. 
GUIDANCE AND CASE STUDIES FOR ESG INTEGRATION
CFA Institute and the United Nations–supported Principles for Responsible 
Investment (PRI) initiative published a best practice report (“Guidance and Case 
Studies for ESG Integration: Equities and Fixed Income”) and three regional 
reports—one for the Americas (AMER), one for Asia Pacific (APAC), and one 
for Europe, the Middle East, and Africa (EMEA)—to help investors understand 
how they can better integrate ESG factors into their equity, corporate bond, 
and sovereign debt portfolios. This report contains many case studies of ESG 
integration and introduces an ESG Integration Framework as a reference for 
practitioners. The following two cases are brief excerpts from that report.
Adjusting Revenue and Margins
In “Evaluating ESG Impact on Revenue and Margins, ” AGF Investments Inc. 
illustrates how ESG information can be used to adjust forecasted financials. In 
this case study, Company A is a global leader in specialty chemicals that has 
positioned itself to profit from trending consumer preferences for sustainable 
products. Company A recently shifted from purchasing petrochemicals for use 
as a product base to manufacturing its own product base using naturally sourced, 
renewable raw materials. AGF analysts project that the shift to in-house man -
ufacturing and use of renewable materials will reduce costs from purchasing 
petrochemicals and managing hazardous waste materials. Analysts also project 
that consumers will pay a premium for Company A’s sustainable products versus 
competitors’ petrochemical-based products, which will increase annual revenue 
growth by 30 bps. Analysts estimate that the cost savings plus increased revenue 
over the next five years will result in a 100 bp improvement to EBIT (earnings 
before interest and taxes).
Adjusting the P/E Multiple
The case study “Valuation Adjustment According to Environmental Regulations” 
demonstrates the use of ESG information to adjust the P/E multiple.
In this example, analysts at E Fund Management Co., Limited, believed that 
new pollution regulations in China would be strictly enforced and developed a 
four-factor framework to score companies in affected industries on environmen -
tal protection factors. The case study compares the evaluation of Y Chemical 
and H Corporation. After scoring the companies, analysts concluded that H 
Corporation had a greater environmental risk than Y Chemical. Analysts were 
unable to estimate the projected environmental protection costs for the two 
companies, so they chose to discount the target P/E for H Corporation to a 
The Roles of Equities in a Portfolio 9
P/E of 20 versus the industry average P/E of 23.7 (trailing 12 months). Analysts 
believed that H Corporation was overpriced due to its environmental risks not 
being recognized by the market and thus would have a negative return.
Source:  CFA Institute and the PRI, “Guidance and Case Studies in ESG Integration: Equities and 
Fixed Income” (2018). www  .cfainstitute  .org/  -/ media/  documents/  survey/  guidance  -case  -studies  
-esg -integration  .pdf.
Two other approaches to ESG investing are thematic investing  and impact 
investing . Thematic investing refers to investing in companies with positive exposure 
to ESG megatrends, such as clean energy, green technology, sustainable agriculture, 
gender diversity, or affordable housing. Global economic development has raised the 
demand for energy at the same time as increased greenhouse gas emissions are widely 
believed to negatively affect the earth’s climate. Similarly, rising global living standards 
and industrial needs have created a greater demand for water along with the need to 
prevent drought or increase access to clean drinking water in certain regions of the 
world. While these themes are based on trends related to environmental issues, social 
issues—such as access to affordable health care and nutrition—are also of interest.
Impact investing is a related approach that seeks to achieve targeted social or 
environmental objectives along with measurable financial returns through engage -
ment with a company or by direct investment in projects or companies. An example 
would include investing in products or services that help achieve 1 (or more) of the 
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) launched by the United Nations in 2015, 
such as “SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation—Ensure availability and sustainable 
management of water and sanitation for all” and “SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and 
Communities—Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sus -
tainable. ” Impact investing is a relatively smaller segment of the broader sustainable 
and responsible investing market. 
ROLES OF EQUITIES
1. Alex Chang, Lin Choi, and Frank Huber manage separate equity 
portfolios for the same investment firm. Chang’s portfolio objective is con -
servative in nature, with a regular stream of income as the primary invest -
ment objective. Choi’s portfolio is more aggressive in nature, with a long-
term horizon and with growth as the primary objective. Finally, Huber’s 
portfolio consists of wealthy entrepreneurs who are concerned about rising 
inflation and wish to preserve the purchasing power of their wealth.
Discuss the investment approach that each portfolio manager would likely 
use to achieve his or her portfolio objectives. 
Solution
Given that his portfolio is focused on a regular stream of income, Chang is 
likely to focus on companies with regular dividend income. More specifical -
ly, Chang is likely to invest in large, well-established companies with stable 
or growing dividend payments. With a long-term horizon, Choi is most 
interested in capital appreciation of her portfolio, so she is likely to focus on 
companies with earnings growth and competitive success. Finally, Huber’s 
clients are concerned about the effects of inflation, so he will likely seek to 
invest in shares of companies that can provide an inflation hedge. Huber 
would likely seek companies that can successfully pass on higher input costs 
to their customers, and he may also seek commodity producers that may 
benefit from rising commodity prices.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 10
EQUITY INVESTMENT UNIVERSE
describe how an equity manager’s investment universe can be 
segmented
Given the extensive range of companies in which an equity portfolio manager may 
invest and the range of clients’ risk and return objectives, an important task for the 
manager is to segment the universe by grouping companies according to similar 
characteristics. This segmentation enables portfolio managers to better evaluate and 
analyze their equity investment universe, and it can help with portfolio diversification. 
Several approaches to segmenting the equity investment universe are discussed in 
the following sections.
Segmentation by Size and Style
A popular approach to segmenting the equity universe incorporates two factors: 
(1) size and (2) style. Size is typically measured by market capitalization and often 
categorized by large cap, mid cap, and small cap. Style is typically classified as value, 
growth, or a combination of value and growth (typically termed “blend” or “core”). 
In addition, style is often determined through a “scoring” system that incorporates 
multiple metrics or ratios, such as price-to-book ratios, price-to-earnings ratios, 
earnings growth, dividend yield, and book value growth. These metrics are then 
typically “scored” individually for each company, assigned certain weights, and then 
aggregated. The result is a composite score that determines where the company’s stock 
is positioned along the value–growth spectrum. A combination of growth and value 
style is not uncommon, particularly for large corporations that have both mature and 
higher-growth business lines.
Exhibit 4  illustrates a common matrix that reflects size and style dimensions. Each 
category in the matrix can be represented by companies with considerably different 
business activities. For example, both a small, mature metal fabricating business and 
a small health care services provider may fall in the Small Cap Value category. An 
example of how several listed companies are categorized as of February 2023 is shown 
in Exhibit 5 . In practice, individual stocks may not clearly fall into one of the size/
style categories and classification is dynamic, so these are best thought of as guidelines 
rather than a strict taxonomy.
Exhibit 4: Equity Size and Style Matrix
Style
Value Blend Growth
Large
Mid
Small
Source:  Morningstar.3
Equity Investment Universe 11
Exhibit 5: Equity Size and Style, Example Classifications as of February 2023
Style
Value Blend Growth
Large Samsung Electronics 
Co. Ltd.Tencent Meituan
Mid Schroders PLC Gedeon Richter Ocado PLC
Small Hawaiian Airlines National Beverage 
Corp.WeWork Inc.
Source:  Morningstar.
Segmentation by size/style can provide several advantages for portfolio managers. 
First, portfolio managers can construct an overall equity portfolio that reflects desired 
risk, return, and income characteristics in a relatively straightforward and manageable 
way. Second, given the broad range of companies in each segment, segmentation by 
size/style results in diversification across economic sectors or industries. Third, active 
equity managers—that is, those seeking to outperform a given benchmark portfolio—
can construct performance benchmarks for specific size/style segments. Generally, 
large investment management firms may have sizable teams dedicated toward specific 
size/style categories, while small firms may specialize in a specific size/style category, 
particularly mid-cap and small-cap companies, seeking to outperform a standard 
benchmark or comparable peer group.
The final advantage of segmentation by size/style is that it allows a portfolio to 
reflect a company’s maturity and potentially changing growth/value orientation. 
Specifically, many companies that undertake an IPO (initial public offering) are small 
and in a growth phase, and thus they may fall in the small-cap growth category. If 
these companies can successfully grow, their size may ultimately move to mid-cap or 
even large cap, while their style may conceivably shift from high growth to value or 
a combination of growth and value (e.g., a growth and income stock). Accordingly, 
over the life cycle of companies, investor preferences for these companies may shift 
increasingly from capital appreciation to dividend income. In addition, segmentation 
also helps fund managers adjust holdings over time—for example, when stocks that 
were previously considered to be in the growth category mature and possibly become 
value stocks. The key disadvantages of segmentation by size/style are that the categories 
may change over time and may be defined differently among investors.
Segmentation by Geography
Another common approach to equity universe segmentation is by geography. This 
approach is typically based on the stage of markets’ macroeconomic development 
and wealth. Common geographic categories are developed markets , emerging markets , 
and frontier markets . Exhibit 6  demonstrates the commonly used geographic segmen -
tation of international equity indexes according to MSCI. MSCI classifies countries 
as developed, emerging, or frontier according to a holistic framework that considers 
economic development, size and liquidity, and accessibility criteria, such as openness 
to foreign equity ownership. Other major index providers—such as FTSE, Standard 
& Poor’s, and Russell—provide similar types of international equity indexes. 
Geographic segmentation is useful to equity investors who have considerable 
exposure to their domestic market and want to diversify by investing in global equi -
ties. A key weakness of geographic segmentation is that investing in a specific market 
(e.g., market index) may provide lower-than-expected exposure to that market. As 
an example, Nestle, Roche, and Novartis together account for over half of the MSCI 
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 12
Switzerland Index, but Switzerland accounts for less than 2% of each company’s sales. 
Another key weakness of geographic segmentation is potential currency risk when 
investing in different global equity markets.
Exhibit 6: MSCI International Equity Indexes (as of January 2023)
Developed Markets
Americas Europe and Middle East Pacific
Canada  
United StatesAustria  
Belgium  
Denmark  
Finland  
France  
Germany  
Ireland  
Israel  
Italy  
Netherlands  
Norway  
Portugal  
Spain  
Sweden  
Switzerland  
United KingdomAustralia  
Hong Kong SAR  
Japan  
New Zealand  
Singapore
Emerging Markets
Americas Europe, Middle East, and Africa Asia Pacific
Brazil  
Chile  
Colombia  
Mexico  
PeruCzech Republic  
Egypt  
Greece  
Hungary  
Kuwait  
Poland  
Qatar  
Saudi Arabia  
South Africa  
Turke y  
United Arab EmiratesChinese mainland  
India  
Indonesia  
South Korea  
Malaysia  
Philippines  
Taiwan region  
Thailand
Frontier Markets
Europe and CIS1Africa Middle East Asia
Croatia  
Estonia  
Iceland  
Lithuania  
Kazakhstan  
Romania  
Serbia  
SloveniaKenya  
Mauritius  
Morocco  
Nigeria  
Tunisia  
WAEMU2Bahrain  
Jordan  
OmanBangladesh  
Pakistan  
Sri Lanka  
Vietnam
Notes:  The following markets are not included in the developed, emerging, or MSCI frontier indexes 
but have their own market-specific indexes: Argentina, Jamaica, Panama, Trinidad and Tobago, Bosnia 
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Malta, Russia, Ukraine, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Lebanon, and Palestine.
1CIS:  Commonwealth of Independent States (formerly the USSR).
2WAEMU:  West African Economic and Monetary Union, also known by its French acronym UEMOA, 
Equity Investment Universe 13
which consists of the following countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, 
Senegal, and Togo.
Segmentation by Economic Activity
Economic activity is another characteristic that portfolio managers may use to segment 
the equity universe. Most equity classification systems group companies into industries/
sectors using a market-oriented  approach, grouping companies based on the markets 
they serve, the way revenue is earned, and the way customers use companies’ products. 
The four main commercial global classification systems, which were discussed 
earlier in the curriculum, are (1) the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS); 
(2) the Industrial Classification Benchmark (ICB); (3) the Thomson Reuters Business 
Classification (TRBC); and (4) the Russell Global Sectors Classification (RGS). These 
classification systems help standardize industry definitions so that portfolio man -
agers can compare and analyze companies and industries/sectors. In addition, the 
classification systems are useful in the creation of industry performance benchmarks.
Exhibit 7  compares the four primary classification systems. Each system is classi -
fied broadly and then increasingly more granularly to compare companies and their 
underlying businesses.
Exhibit 7: Primary Sector Classification Systems
Level/ 
System GICS ICB TRBC RGS
1st 11 Sectors 10 Industries 10 Economic Sectors 9 Economic Sectors
2nd 24 Industry Groups 19 Super Sectors 28 Business Sectors 33 Sub-Sectors
3rd 68 Industries 41 Sectors 54 Industry Groups 157 Industries
4th 157 Sub-Industries 114 Sub-Sectors 136 Industries Not Applicable
Sources:  Thomson Reuters, S&P/MSCI, FTSE/Dow Jones.
To illustrate how segmentation of the classification systems may be used in practice, 
Exhibit 8  demonstrates how GICS, perhaps the most prominent classification sys -
tem, sub-divides selected sectors—in this case, Consumer Discretionary, Consumer 
Staples, and Information Technology—into certain industry group, industry, and 
sub-industry levels.
Exhibit 8: GICS Classification Examples
SectorConsumer 
Discretionary Consumer Staples Information Technology
Industry Group 
ExampleAutomobiles and 
ComponentsFood, Beverage, 
and TobaccoTechnology Hardware 
and Equipment
Industry Example Automobiles Beverages Electronic Equipment, 
Instruments, and 
Components
Sub-Industry 
ExampleMotorcycle 
ManufacturersSoft Drinks Electronic Manufacturing 
Services
Source:  MSCI.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 14
As with other segmentation approaches mentioned previously, segmentation by eco -
nomic activity enables equity portfolio managers to construct performance benchmarks 
for specific sectors or industries. Portfolio managers may also obtain better industry 
representation (diversification) by segmenting their equity universe according to 
economic activity. The key disadvantage of segmentation by economic activity is that 
the business activities of companies—particularly, large ones—may include more than 
one industry or sub-industry.
SEGMENTING THE EQUITY INVESTMENT UNIVERSE
1. A portfolio manager is initiating a new fund that seeks to invest in 
the Chinese robotics industry, which is experiencing rapidly accelerating 
earnings. To help identify appropriate company stocks, the portfolio manag -
er wants to select an approach to segment the equity universe.
Recommend which segmentation approach would be most appropriate for 
the portfolio manager.
Solution
Based on his desired strategy to invest in companies with rapidly accelerat -
ing (growing) earnings, the portfolio manager would most likely segment 
his equity universe by size/style. The portfolio manager would most likely 
use an investment style that reflects growth, with size (large cap, mid cap, or 
small cap) depending on the company being analyzed. Other segmentation 
approaches, including those according to geography and economic activity, 
would be less appropriate for the portfolio manager given the similar geo -
graphic and industry composition of the Chinese robotics industry.
Segmentation of Equity Indexes and Benchmarks
Segmentation of equity indexes or benchmarks reflects some of or all the approaches 
previously discussed in this section. For example, the MSCI Europe Large Cap Growth 
Index, the MSCI World Small Cap Value Index, the MSCI Emerging Markets Large 
Cap Growth Index, and the MSCI Latin America Midcap Index combine various 
geographic, size, and style dimensions. This combination of geography, size, and style 
also sometimes applies to individual countries—particularly those in large, developed 
markets.
A more focused approach to segmentation of equity indexes uses industries or 
sectors. Because many industries and sectors are global in scope, the most common 
types of these indexes are composed of companies in different countries. Examples 
include the following:
 ■Global Natural Resources—the S&P Global Natural Resources Index  
includes 90 of the largest publicly traded companies in natural resources and 
commodities businesses across three primary commodity-related sectors: 
agribusiness, energy, and metals and mining.
 ■Worldwide Oil and Natural Gas—the MSCI World Energy Index  includes 
the large-cap and mid-cap segments of publicly traded oil and natural gas 
companies in the developed markets.
 ■Multinational Financials—the Refinitiv Global Financials Index  includes the 
100 largest publicly traded companies in the global financial services sector 
as defined by the TRBC classification system.
Income Associated with Owning and Managing an Equity Portfolio 15
Finally, some indexes reflect specific investment approaches, such as ESG investing. 
Such ESG indexes are made up of companies that reflect certain considerations, such 
as sustainability or impact investing.
INCOME ASSOCIATED WITH OWNING AND 
MANAGING AN EQUITY PORTFOLIO
describe the types of income and costs associated with owning and 
managing an equity portfolio and their potential effects on portfolio 
performance
Dividends are the primary source of income for equity portfolios. In addition, some 
portfolio managers may use securities lending or option-writing strategies to gener -
ate income. On the cost side, equity portfolios incur various fees and trading costs 
that adversely affect portfolio returns. The primary types of income and costs are 
discussed in this section.
Dividend Income
Investors requiring regular income may prefer to invest in stocks with large or fre -
quent dividend payments, whereas growth-oriented investors may have little interest 
in dividends. Taxation is an important consideration for dividend income received, 
particularly for individuals. Depending on the country where the investor is domi -
ciled, where dividends are issued, and the type of investor, dividends may be subject 
to withholding tax and/or income tax.
Beyond regular dividends, equity portfolios may receive special dividends  from 
certain companies. Special dividends occur when companies decide to distribute 
excess cash to shareholders, but the payments may not be maintained over time. 
Optional stock dividends  are another type of dividend in which shareholders may 
elect to receive either cash or new shares. When the share price used to calculate the 
number of stock dividend shares is established before the shareholder’s election date, 
the choice between a cash or stock dividend may be important. This choice represents 
“optionality” for the shareholder, and the optionality has value. Some market partic -
ipants, typically investment banks, may offer to purchase this “option, ” providing an 
additional, if modest, source of income to an equity investor.
Securities Lending Income
For some investors, securities lending —a form of collateralized lending—may be 
used to generate income for portfolios. Securities lending can facilitate short sales, 
which involve the sale of securities the seller does not own. When a securities lend -
ing transaction involves the transfer of equities, the transaction is generally known 
as stock lending  and the securities are generally known as stock loans.  Stock loans 
are collateralized with either cash or other high-quality securities to provide some 
financial protection to the lender. Stock loans are usually open-ended in duration, but 
the borrower must return the shares to the lender on demand.
Stock lenders generally receive a fee from the stock borrower as compensation for 
the loaned shares. Most stock loans in developed markets earn a modest fee, approx -
imately 0.2%–0.5% on an annualized basis. In emerging markets, fees are typically 4
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 16
higher, often 1%–2% annualized for large-cap stocks. In many equity markets, certain 
stocks—called “specials”—are in high demand for borrowing. These specials can earn 
fees that are substantially higher than average (typically 5%–15% annualized), and in 
cases of extreme demand, they could be as high as 25%–100% annually. However, such 
high fees do not normally persist for long periods of time.
In addition to fees earned, stock lenders can generate further income by reinvesting 
the cash collateral received (assuming a favorable interest rate environment). However, 
as with virtually any other investment, the collateral would be subject to market risk, 
credit risk, liquidity risk, and operational risk. The administrative costs of a securities 
lending program, in turn, will reduce the collateral income generated. Dividends on 
loaned stock are “manufactured” by the stock borrower for the stock lender; that is, 
the stock borrower ensures that the stock lender is compensated for any dividends 
that the lender would have received had the stock not been loaned.
Index funds are frequent stock lenders because of their large, long-term holdings 
in stocks. In addition, because index funds merely seek to replicate the performance 
of an index, portfolio managers of these funds are normally not concerned that 
borrowed stock used for short-selling purposes might decrease the prices of the 
corresponding equities. Large, actively managed pension funds, endowments, and 
institutional investors are also frequent stock lenders, although these investors are 
likely more concerned with the effect on their returns if the loaned shares are used 
to facilitate short selling. The evidence on the impact of stock lending on asset prices 
has, however, been mixed (see, for example, Kaplan, Moskowitz, and Sensoy 2013 ).
Ancillary Investment Strategies
Additional income can be generated for an equity portfolio through a trading strat -
egy known as dividend capture . Under this strategy, an equity portfolio manager 
purchases stocks just before their ex-dividend dates, holds these stocks through the 
ex-dividend date to earn the right to receive the dividend, and subsequently sells the 
shares. Once a stock goes ex-dividend, the share price should, in theory, decrease by 
the value of the dividend. In this way, capturing dividends would increase portfolio 
income, although the portfolio would—again, in theory—experience capital losses 
of similar magnitude. However, the share price movement could vary from this the -
oretical assumption given income tax considerations, stock-specific supply/demand 
conditions, and general stock market moves around the ex-dividend date.
Selling (writing) options can also generate additional income for an equity portfo -
lio. One such option strategy is writing a covered call , whereby the portfolio manager 
already owns the underlying stock and sells a call option on that stock. Another option 
strategy is writing a cash-covered put  (also called a cash-secured put ), whereby the 
portfolio manager writes a put option on a stock and simultaneously deposits money 
equal to the exercise price into a designated account. Under both covered calls and 
cash-covered puts, income is generated through the writing of options, but clearly 
the risk profile of the portfolio would be altered. For example, writing a covered call 
would limit the upside from share price appreciation of the underlying shares.
EQUITY PORTFOLIO INCOME
1. Isabel Cordova is an equity portfolio manager for a large multina -
tional investment firm. Her portfolio consists of several dividend-paying 
stocks, and she is interested in generating additional income to enhance the 
Costs Associated with Owning and Managing an Equity Portfolio 17
portfolio’s total return. Describe potential sources of additional income for 
Cordova’s equity portfolio.
Solution
Cordova’s primary source of income for her portfolio would likely be “reg -
ular” and, in some cases, special dividends from those companies that pay 
them. Another potential source of income for Cordova is securities (stock) 
lending, whereby eligible equities in her portfolio can be loaned to other 
market participants, including those seeking to sell short securities. In this 
case, income would be generated from fees received from the stock borrow -
er as well as from reinvesting the cash collateral received. Another potential 
income-generating strategy available to Cordova is dividend capture, which 
entails purchasing stocks just before their ex-dividend dates, holding the 
stocks through the ex-dividend date to earn the right to receive the divi -
dend, and subsequently selling the shares. Selling (writing) options, includ -
ing covered call and cash-covered put (cash-secured put) strategies, is an -
other way Cordova can generate additional income for her equity portfolio.
COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH OWNING AND MANAGING 
AN EQUITY PORTFOLIO
describe the types of income and costs associated with owning and 
managing an equity portfolio and their potential effects on portfolio 
performance
Management Fees
Management fees are typically determined as a percentage of the funds under man -
agement (an ad-valorem  fee) at regular intervals. For actively managed portfolios, the 
level of management fees involves a balance between fees that are high enough to 
fund investment research but low enough to avoid detracting too much from inves -
tor returns. Management fees for actively managed portfolios include direct costs of 
research (e.g., remuneration and expenses for investment analysts and portfolio man -
agers) and the direct costs of portfolio management (e.g., software, trade processing 
costs, and compliance). For index-based portfolios, management fees are typically 
low because of lower direct costs of research and portfolio management relative to 
actively managed portfolios.
Investment managers typically present a standard schedule of fees to a prospective 
client, although actual fees can be negotiated between the manager and investors. 
For a fund, fees are established in the prospectus, although investors could negotiate 
special terms (e.g., a discount for being an early investor in a fund).
Performance Fees
In addition to management fees, portfolio managers sometimes earn performance 
fees (also known as incentive fees) on their portfolios. Performance fees are generally 
associated with hedge funds and long/short equity portfolios, rather than long-only 
portfolios. These fees are an incentive for portfolio managers to achieve or outperform 5
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 18
return objectives, to the benefit of both the manager and investors. As an example, a 
performance fee might represent 10%–20% of any capital appreciation in a portfolio 
that exceeds some stated annual absolute return threshold (e.g., 8%). Several perfor -
mance fee structures exist, although performance fees tend to be “upwards only”; that 
is, fees are earned by the manager when performance objectives are met, but fund 
investors are not reimbursed when performance is negative. However, performance 
fees could be reduced following a period of poor performance. Fee calculations also 
reflect high-water marks. A high-water mark  is the highest value, net of fees, that 
the fund has reached. The use of high-water marks protects clients from paying twice 
for the same performance. For example, if a fund performed well in a given year, it 
might earn a performance fee. If the value of the same fund fell the following year, no 
performance fee would be payable. Then, if the fund’s value increased in the third year 
to a point just below the value achieved at the end of the first year, no performance fee 
would be earned because the fund’s value did not exceed the high-water mark. This 
basic fee structure is used by many alternative investment funds and partnerships, 
including hedge funds.
Administration Fees
Equity portfolios are subject to administration fees. These fees include the process -
ing of corporate actions, such as rights issues; the measurement of performance and 
risk of a portfolio; and voting at company meetings. Generally, these functions are 
provided by an investment management firm itself and are included as part of the 
management fee.
Some functions, however, are provided by external parties, with the fees charged 
to the client in addition to management fees. These externally provided functions 
include the following:
 ■Custody fees  paid for the safekeeping of assets by a custodian (often a sub -
sidiary of a large bank) that is independent of the investment manager
 ■Depository fees  paid to help ensure that custodians segregate the assets of 
the portfolio and that the portfolio complies with any investment limits, 
leverage requirements, and limits on cash holdings
 ■Registration fees  that are associated with the registration of ownership of 
units in a mutual fund
Marketing and Distribution Costs
Most investment management firms market and distribute their services to some 
degree. Marketing and distribution costs typically include the following:
 ■Costs of employing marketing, sales, and client servicing staff
 ■Advertising costs
 ■Sponsorship costs, including costs associated with sponsoring or presenting 
at conferences
 ■Costs of producing and distributing brochures or other communications to 
financial intermediaries or prospective clients
 ■“Platform” fees, which are costs incurred when an intermediary offers an 
investment management firm fund services on the intermediary’s platform 
of funds (e.g., a “funds supermarket”)
 ■Sales commissions paid to such financial intermediaries as financial plan -
ners, independent financial advisers, and brokers to facilitate the distribu -
tion of funds or investment services
Costs Associated with Owning and Managing an Equity Portfolio 19
When marketing and distribution services are performed by an investment man -
agement firm, the costs are likely included as part of the management fee. However, 
those marketing and distribution services that are performed by external parties (e.g., 
consultants) typically incur additional costs to the investor.
Trading Costs
Buying and selling equities incur a series of trading (or transaction) costs. Some of 
these trading costs are explicit, including brokerage commission costs, taxes, stamp 
duties, and stock exchange fees. In addition, many countries charge a modest regu -
latory fee for certain types of equity trading.
In contrast to explicit costs, some trading costs are implicit in nature. These implicit 
costs include the following:
 ■Bid–offer spread
 ■Market impact (also called price impact), which measures the effect of the 
trade on transaction prices
 ■Delay costs (also called slippage), which arise from the inability to complete 
desired trades immediately because of order size or lack of market liquidity
In an equity portfolio, total trading costs are a function of the size of trades, the 
frequency of trading, and the degree to which trades demand liquidity from the 
market. Unlike many other equity portfolio costs, such as management fees, the 
total cost of trading is generally not revealed to the investor. Rather, trading costs 
are incorporated into a portfolio’s total return and presented as overall performance 
data. One final trading cost relates to stock lending transactions that were previously 
discussed. Equity portfolio managers who borrow shares in these transactions must 
pay fees on shares borrowed.
Investment Approaches and Effects on Costs
Equity portfolio costs tend to vary depending on their underlying strategy or approach. 
As mentioned previously, index-based strategies tend to charge lower management fees 
than active strategies primarily because of lower research costs. Index-based equity 
portfolios also tend to trade less frequently than actively managed equity portfolios, 
with trading in index-based portfolios typically involving rebalancing or changes 
to index constituents. Index funds, however, do face a “hidden” cost from potential 
predatory trading. As an illustration, a predatory trader may purchase (or sell short) 
shares prior to their effective inclusion (or deletion) from an index, resulting in price 
movement and potential profit for a predatory trader. Such predatory trading strat -
egies can be regarded as a cost to investors in index funds, albeit a cost that is not 
necessarily evident to a portfolio manager or investor.
Some active investing approaches “demand liquidity” from the market. For example, 
in a momentum strategy, the investor seeks to buy shares that are already rising in price 
(or sell those that are already falling). In contrast, some active investing approaches 
are more likely to “provide liquidity” to the market, such as deep value strategies (i.e., 
those involving stocks that are deemed to be significantly undervalued). Investment 
strategies that involve frequent trading and demand liquidity are, unsurprisingly, likely 
to have higher trading costs than long-term, buy-and-hold investment strategies.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 20
SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
describe the potential benefits of shareholder engagement and the 
role an equity manager might play in shareholder engagement
Shareholder engagement refers to the process whereby investors actively interact with 
companies. Shareholder engagement often includes voting on corporate matters at 
general meetings as well as other forms of communication (e.g., quarterly investor 
calls or in-person meetings) between shareholders and representatives of a company. 
Generally, shareholder engagement concerns issues that can affect the value of a 
company and, by extension, an investor’s shares.
When shareholders engage with companies, several issues may be discussed, 
including the following:
 ■Strategy —a company’s strategic goals, resources, plans for growth, and 
constraints. Also of interest may be a company’s research, product develop -
ment, culture, sustainability and corporate responsibility, and industry and 
competitor developments. Shareholders may ask the company how it bal -
ances short-term requirements and long-term goals and how it prioritizes 
the interests of its various stakeholders.
 ■Allocation of capital —a company’s process for selecting new projects as 
well as its mergers and acquisitions strategy. Shareholders may be interested 
to learn about policies on dividends, financial leverage, equity raising, and 
capital expenditures.
 ■Corporate governance and regulatory and political risk —including internal 
controls and the operation of the company’s audit and risk committees.
 ■Remuneration —compensation structures for directors and senior manage -
ment, incentives for certain behaviors, and alignment of interests between 
directors and shareholders. 
 ■Composition of the board of directors —succession planning, director exper -
tise and competence, culture, diversity, and board effectiveness.
Benefits of Shareholder Engagement
Shareholder engagement can provide benefits for both shareholders and companies. 
From a company’s perspective, shareholder engagement can assist in developing a 
more effective corporate governance culture. In turn, shareholder engagement may 
lead to better company performance to the benefit of shareholders (as well as other 
stakeholders).
Investors may also benefit from engagement because they will have more informa -
tion about companies or the sectors in which companies operate. Such information 
may include a company’s strategy, culture, and competitive environment within an 
industry. Shareholder engagement is particularly relevant for active portfolio man -
agers. By contrast, index-based fund managers are primarily focused on tracking a 
given benchmark or index while minimizing costs to do so. Any process, such as 
shareholder engagement, that takes up management time (and adds to cost) would 
detract from the primary goal of an index-based manager. This would be less of an 
issue for very large index-based portfolios, where any engagement costs could be 
spread over a sizable asset base.6
Shareholder Engagement 21
Investors who do not pursue engagement can still benefit from the shareholder 
engagement of others as so-called free riders. Specifically, assume that a portfolio 
manager using an active strategy actively engages with a company to improve its 
operations and was successful in increasing the company’s stock price. The manager’s 
actions in this case improved the value of his portfolio and also benefited other inves -
tors who own the same stock in their portfolios. Investors who did not participate in 
shareholder engagement benefited from improved performance but without the costs 
necessary for engagement.
In addition to shareholders, other stakeholders of a company may also have an 
interest in the process and outcomes of shareholder engagement. These stakeholders 
may include creditors, customers, employees, regulators, governmental bodies, and 
certain other members of society (e.g., community organizations and citizen groups). 
These other stakeholders can gain or lose influence with companies depending on the 
outcomes of shareholder engagement. For example, employees can be affected by cost 
reduction programs requested by shareholders. Another example is when creditors 
of a company are affected by a change in a company’s vendor payment terms, which 
can impact the company’s working capital and cash flow. Such external forces as the 
media, the academic community, corporate governance consultants, and proxy voting 
advisers can also influence the process of shareholder engagement.
Shareholders that also have non-financial interests, such as ESG considerations, 
may also benefit from shareholder engagement. However, these benefits are difficult 
to quantify. Empirical evidence relating shareholder returns to a company’s adherence 
to corporate governance and ESG practices is mixed. This mixed evidence could be 
partly attributable to the fact that a company’s management quality and effective ESG 
practices may be correlated with one another. As a result, it is often difficult to isolate 
non-financial factors and measure the direct effects of shareholder engagement.
Disadvantages of Shareholder Engagement
Shareholder engagement is time consuming and can be costly for both shareholders 
and companies. Second, pressure on company management to meet near-term share 
price or earnings targets could be made at the expense of long-term corporate deci -
sions. Third, engagement can result in selective disclosure of important information to 
a certain subset of shareholders, which could lead to a breach of insider trading rules 
while in possession of specific, material, non-public information about a company. 
Finally, conflicts of interest can result for a company. For example, a portfolio manager 
could engage with a company that also happens to be an investor in the manager’s 
portfolio. In such a situation, a portfolio manager may be unduly influenced to sup -
port the company’s management so as not to jeopardize the company’s investment 
mandate with the portfolio manager.
The Role of an Equity Manager in Shareholder Engagement
Active managers of equity portfolios typically engage, to some degree, with compa -
nies in which they currently (or potentially) invest. In fact, investment firms in some 
countries have legal or regulatory responsibilities to establish written policies on 
stewardship and/or shareholder engagement. Engagement activities for equity port -
folio managers often include regular meetings with company management or investor 
relations teams. Such meetings can occur at any time but are often held after annual, 
semi-annual, or quarterly company results have been published.
Larger investment firms may also employ an analyst (or team of analysts) that 
focus on ESG issues. They work in conjunction with traditional investment analysts 
on shareholder voting and other engagement topics. 
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 22
Activist Investing
Activist investing is a distinct and specialized version of engagement. Activist investors 
(or activists) specialize in taking stakes in companies and creating change to generate a 
gain on their investment. Hedge funds are among the most common activists, possibly 
because of the potential for, in many cases, high performance fees. In addition, because 
hedge funds are subject to limited regulation, have fewer investment constraints, and 
can often leverage positions, these investors often have more flexibility as activists.
Engagement through activist investing can include meetings with management, 
shareholder resolutions, letters to management, presentations to other investors, and 
media campaigns. Activists may also seek representation on a company’s board of 
directors as a way of exerting influence. Proxy contests are one method used to obtain 
board representation. These contests represent corporate takeover mechanisms in 
which shareholders are persuaded to vote for a group seeking a controlling position 
on a company’s board of directors. Social media and other communication tools can 
help activists coordinate the actions of other shareholders.
Voting
The participation of shareholders in general meetings, also known as general assemblies, 
and the exercise of their voting rights are among the most influential tools available 
for shareholder engagement. General meetings enable shareholders to participate 
in discussions and to vote on major corporate matters and transactions that are not 
delegated to the board of directors. By engaging in general meetings, shareholders 
can exercise their voting rights on major corporate issues and better monitor the 
performance of the board and senior management.
Proxy voting enables shareholders who are unable to attend a meeting to autho -
rize another individual (e.g., another shareholder or director) to vote on their behalf. 
Proxy voting is the most common form of investor participation in general meetings. 
Although most resolutions pass without controversy, sometimes minority shareholders 
attempt to strengthen their influence at companies via proxy voting. Occasionally, 
multiple shareholders may use this process to collectively vote their shares in favor 
of or in opposition to a certain resolution.
Some investors use external proxy advisory firms, such as Institutional Shareholder 
Services and Glass Lewis, that provide voting recommendations and reduce research 
efforts by investors. Portfolio managers need not follow the recommendations of 
proxy advisers, but these external parties can highlight potential controversial issues. 
An investor’s voting instructions are typically processed electronically via third-party 
proxy voting agents.
When an investor loans shares, the transaction is technically an assignment of title 
with a repurchase option; that is, the voting rights are transferred to the borrower. The 
transfer of voting rights with stock lending could potentially result in the borrower 
having different voting opinions from the lending investor. To mitigate this problem, 
some stock lenders recall shares ahead of voting resolutions to enable exercise of their 
voting rights. The downside of this action would be the loss of stock lending revenue 
during the period of stock loan recall and potential reputation risk as an attractive 
lender. Investors, in some cases, may borrow shares explicitly to exercise the voting 
rights attached. This process is called empty voting , whereby no capital is invested in 
the voted shares.
SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
1. An investor manages a fund with a sizable concentration in the 
transportation sector and is interested in meeting with senior management 
of a small aircraft manufacturer. Discuss how the investor may benefit from 
Equity Investment across the Active Management Spectrum 23
his or her shareholder engagement activities, as well as from the shareholder 
engagement of other investors, with this manufacturer.
Solution
The investor may benefit from information obtained about the aircraft man -
ufacturer, such as its strategy, allocation of capital, corporate governance, 
remuneration of directors and senior management, culture, and competitive 
environment within the aerospace industry. The investor may also benefit 
as a “free rider, ” whereby other investors may improve the manufacturer’s 
operating performance through shareholder engagement—to the benefit 
of all shareholders. Finally, if the investor has non-financial interests, such 
as ESG, he or she may address these considerations as part of shareholder 
engagement.
EQUITY INVESTMENT ACROSS THE ACTIVE 
MANAGEMENT SPECTRUM
describe rationales for equity investment across the active 
management spectrum
The debate over index-based and active management of equity portfolios has been 
a longstanding one in the investment community. In reality, the decision between 
index-based and active management is not an “either/or” (binary) alternative. Instead, 
equity portfolios tend to exist on a spectrum, ranging from portfolios that closely 
track a broad, market-capitalization-weighted index to concentrated portfolios of a 
few equity securities. In some cases, portfolios may resemble a “closet index” in which 
the portfolio is advertised as actively managed but is essentially an index fund. For an 
equity manager (or investment firm), there are several considerations for positioning 
a portfolio along the spectrum. 
Confidence to Outperform
An active investment manager typically needs to be confident that she can adequately 
outperform her benchmark. This determination requires an understanding of the 
manager’s equity investment universe, a competitive analysis of other managers that 
have a similar investment universe, and appropriate resources (e.g., research staff and 
access to information). 
Client Preference
For equity portfolio managers, client preference is a primary consideration when 
deciding between index-based or active management. Portfolio managers must assess 
whether their strategies will attract sufficient funds from clients to make the initia -
tives viable. Another consideration reflects investors’ beliefs regarding the potential 
for active strategies to generate positive alpha. For example, in some equity market 
categories, such as large-cap/developed markets, companies are widely known and 
have considerable equity analyst coverage. For such categories, investors often believe 
that potential alpha is substantially reduced because all publicly available information 
is efficiently disseminated, analyzed, and reflected in stock prices.7
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 24
Exhibit 9  illustrates the prevalence of index-based and active management in US 
open-end mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) by Morningstar equity 
category. Nearly all assets under management (AUM) in some categories, such as 
foreign small/mid-cap growth, are managed on an active basis. Other categories, 
such as large-cap blend, are predominantly managed using an index-based approach.
Exhibit 9: Passive versus Active Equities in US Open-End Mutual Funds and 
ETFs
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%Consumer DefensiveFinancialIndustrialsConsumer CyclicalChina RegionLatin America StockEquity EnergyEurope StockJapan StockMid-Cap BlendIndia EquityNatural ResourcesLarge BlendForeign Large BlendSmall BlendEquity Precious MetalsForeign Small/Mid BlendReal EstateCommunicationsTechnologyUtilitiesDiversified Pacific/AsiaPacific/Asia ex-Japan StkInfrastructureHealthDiversified Emerging MktsSmall ValueEnergy Limited PartnershipLarge ValueMid-Cap GrowthGlobal Real EstateWorld Large-Stock BlendLarge GrowthMid-Cap ValueForeign Large ValueSmall GrowthForeign Small/Mid ValueForeign Large GrowthWorld Small/Mid StockWorld Large-Stock ValueWorld Large-Stock GrowthForeign Small/Mid Growth
Percentage Active AUMPassive Active
Source : Morningstar Direct. Data as of 31 October 2021.
Suitable Benchmark
An investor or equity manager’s choice of benchmark can play a meaningful role in 
the ability to attract new funds. This choice is particularly relevant in the institutional 
equity market, where asset owners (and their consultants) regularly screen new man -
agers in desired equity segments. As part of the selection process in desired equity 
segments, active managers normally must have benchmarks with sufficient liquidity 
of underlying securities (thus maintaining a reasonable cost of trading). In addition, 
Equity Investment across the Active Management Spectrum 25
the number of securities underlying the benchmark typically must be broad enough to 
generate sufficient alpha. For this reason, many country or sector-specific investment 
strategies (e.g., consumer defensive companies) are index based. 
Client-Specific Mandates
Client-specific investment mandates, such as those related to ESG considerations, 
are typically managed actively. This active approach occurs because index-based 
management may not be particularly efficient or cost effective when managers must 
meet a client’s desired holdings (or holdings to avoid). For example, a mandate to avoid 
investments in companies involved in certain “unacceptable” activities (e.g., the sale of 
military technology or weapons, tobacco/alcohol, or gambling) requires ongoing mon -
itoring and management. As part of this exclusionary  (or negative ) screening  process, 
managers need to determine those companies that are directly, as well as indirectly, 
involved in such “unacceptable” industries. Although ESG investing is typically active, 
there are a growing number of index-based ESG investment vehicles available.
Risks/Costs of Active Management
As mentioned previously, active equity management is typically more expensive to 
implement than index-based management. Additionally, “key person” risk is relevant 
for active managers if the success of an investment manager’s firm is dependent on 
one or a few individuals (“star managers”) who may potentially leave the firm.
Taxes
Compared with active strategies, index-based strategies generally have lower turnover 
and generate a higher percentage of long-term gains. An index fund that replicates its 
benchmark can have minimal rebalancing. In turn, active strategies can be designed 
to minimize tax consequences of gains/income at the expense of higher trading costs. 
One overall challenge is that tax legislation differs widely among countries.
ACTIVE MANAGEMENT SPECTRUM
1. James Drummond, an equity portfolio manager, is meeting with 
Marie Goudreaux, a wealthy client of his investment firm. Goudreaux is 
very cost conscious and believes that equity markets are highly efficient. 
Goudreaux also has a narrow investment focus, seeking stocks in specific 
country and industry sectors.
Discuss where Goudreaux’s portfolio is likely to be positioned along the 
active management spectrum.
Solution
Goudreaux’s portfolio is likely to be managed using an index-based ap -
proach. Because she believes in market efficiency, Goudreaux likely believes 
that Drummond’s ability to generate alpha is limited. Goudreaux’s cost con -
sciousness also supports index-based management, which is typically less 
expensive to implement than active management. Finally, Goudreaux’s stat -
ed desire to invest in specific countries and sectors aligns with index-based 
approaches.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 26
Advantages of Index-Based Equity Strategies 
Many studies over decades support the use of index-based strategies for equities. 
Renshaw and Feldstein (1960)  observed that the returns of professionally managed 
portfolios trailed the returns on the principal index of that time, the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average. They also concluded that the index would be a good basis for what 
they termed an “unmanaged investment company. ” French (2008)  found that the cost 
of index-based investing is lower than the cost of active management.
Further motivation for index-based investing comes from studies that examine the 
return and risk consequences of security selection versus asset allocation. Brinson, 
Hood, and Beebower (1986)  found a dominant role for asset allocation rather than 
security selection in explaining return variability. With index-based investing, port -
folio managers eschew the idea of security selection, concluding that the benefits do 
not justify the costs.
The efficient market hypothesis gave credence to investors’ interest in indexes by 
theorizing that stock prices incorporate all relevant information—implying that after 
costs, the majority of active investors could not consistently outperform the market. 
With this backdrop, investment managers began to offer strategies to replicate the 
returns of stock market indexes as early as 1971.
Index-based management requires substantially fewer personnel, fewer techno -
logical resources, and less time spent on analysis and management than active man -
agement. Consequently, index-based management fees are generally much lower than 
fees charged by active managers. This fee differential represents the most significant 
and enduring advantage of index-based management.
Another advantage is that managers seeking to track an index can generally 
achieve their objective. Index-based managers model their clients’ portfolios to the 
benchmark’s constituent securities and weights as reported by the index provider, in 
essence replicating the benchmark. The skill of an index-based manager is apparent 
in the ability to deliver risk-adjusted returns and explain their performance to clients. 
Gross-of-fees performance among index-based managers tends to be similar, so much 
of the industry views them as undifferentiated apart from their scope of offerings and 
client-servicing capabilities.
BENCHMARK SELECTION
discuss considerations in choosing a benchmark for an equity 
portfolio
Successful investors choose their performance benchmarks with care. It is surprising 
that investors who spend countless hours analyzing the investment process and past 
performance of an active management strategy may accept a strategy based on a 
benchmark index without question. A comprehensive analysis of the creation meth -
odology and performance of an index is just as important to investors as the analysis 
of an active strategy.
Indexes for Index-Based Strategies 
For an index to become the basis for an equity investment strategy, it must meet three 
initial requirements. It must be rules based, transparent, and investable.8
Benchmark Selection 27
Examples of rules include criteria for including a constituent stock and the fre -
quency with which weights are rebalanced. An active manager may use rules and 
guidelines, but it is often impossible for others to replicate the active manager’s deci -
sion process. Index rules, in contrast, must be objective, consistent, and predictable.
Transparency may be the most important requirement because index-based man -
agers expect to understand the rules underlying their investment choices. Benchmark 
providers disclose the rules used and constituents in creating their indexes without 
any black-box methodologies, which assures investors that indexes will continue to 
represent the intended strategy.
Equity index benchmarks are investable when their performance can be replicated 
in the market. For example, the FTSE 100 Index is an investable index because its 
constituent securities can be purchased easily on the London Stock Exchange. In 
contrast, most investors cannot track hedge fund-of-funds indexes, such as the HFRI 
series of indexes, because of the difficulty of buying the constituent hedge funds. 
Another example of a non-investable index is the Value Line Geometric Index, which 
is a multiplicative average price. The value of the index is obtained by multiplying 
the prices and taking a root corresponding to the number of stocks. This index is not 
useful for investing purposes because it cannot be replicated.
Certain features of individual securities make them non-investable as index con -
stituents. Many stock indexes “free-float adjust” their shares outstanding, which means 
that they count only shares available for trade by the public, excluding those shares that 
are held by founders, governments, or other companies. When a company’s shares that 
are floated in the market are a small fraction of the total shares outstanding, trading 
can result in disproportionate effects. Similarly, stocks for which trading volume is 
a small fraction of the total shares outstanding are likely to have low liquidity and 
commensurately high trading costs. Many indexes consequently require that stocks 
have float and average shares traded above a certain percentage of shares outstanding.
Equity index providers include CRSP , FTSE Russell, Morningstar, MSCI, and 
S&P Dow Jones. These index providers publicize the rules underlying their indexes, 
communicate changes in the constituent securities, and report performance. For a 
fee, they may also provide data to investors who want to replicate the underlying 
basket of securities.
Index providers have taken steps to make their indexes more investable. One key 
decision concerns when individual stocks will migrate from one index to another. As 
a stock increases in market capitalization over time, it might move from small-cap to 
mid-cap to large-cap status (or in the opposite direction if the stock decreases in market 
capitalization). Some index providers have adopted policies intended to limit stock 
migration problems and keep trading costs low for investors who replicate indexes. 
Among these policies are buffering and packeting. Buffering  involves establishing 
ranges around breakpoints that define whether a stock belongs in one index or another. 
As long as stocks remain within the buffer zone, they stay in their current index. For 
example, the MSCI USA Large Cap Index contains the 300 largest companies in the 
US equity market. But a company currently in the MSCI USA Mid Cap Index must 
achieve a rank as the 200th largest stock to move up to the Large Cap Index. Similarly, 
a large-cap constituent must shrink and be the 451st largest stock to move down to 
the Mid Cap Index. Size rankings may change almost every day with market price 
movements, so buffering makes index transitions a more gradual and orderly process.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 28
 
The effect of buffering is demonstrated with the MSCI USA Large Cap Index 
during the regularly scheduled May 2016 reconstitution. The MSCI USA Large 
Cap Index consists of stocks of US-based companies that meet the criterion to 
be considered for large cap. Further, the MSCI USA Large Cap Index is intended 
to represent the largest 70% of the market capitalization of the US equity market. 
At each rebalance date, MSCI sets a cutoff value for the smallest company 
in the index and then sets the buffer value at 67% of the cutoff value. During 
the May 2016 rebalance, the cutoff market capitalization (market cap) of the 
smallest company in the index was USD15,707 million; so, the buffer value was 
USD10,524 million, or approximately USD10.5 billion.
Whole Foods Market, a grocery store operating primarily in the United States 
that was publicly traded before its acquisition by Amazon.com, had experienced 
a drop in market value from USD15.3 billion in May 2015 to USD10.4 billion 
in May 2016. The drop in value put the market cap of Whole Foods Market at a 
lower value than the acceptable buffer. That is, Whole Foods Market was valued 
at USD10.4 billion, which was below the buffer point of USD10.5 billion. Per 
the stated rules, Whole Foods Market was removed from the MSCI USA Large 
Cap Index and was added to the MSCI USA Mid Cap Index.
Packeting  involves splitting stock positions into multiple parts. Let us say that a 
stock is currently in a mid-cap index. If its capitalization increases and breaches the 
breakpoint between mid-cap and large-cap indexes, a portion of the total holding is 
transferred to the large-cap index but the rest stays in the mid-cap index. On the next 
reconstitution date, if the stock value remains large cap and all other qualifications 
are met, the remainder of the shares are moved out of the mid-cap index and into the 
large-cap index. A policy of packeting can keep portfolio turnover and trading costs 
low. The Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) uses packeting in the creation 
of the CRSP family of indexes.
Considerations When Choosing a Benchmark Index
The first consideration when choosing a benchmark index is the desired factor expo -
sures, which is driven by the objectives and constraints in the investor’s investment 
policy statement (IPS). For equity portfolios, the choices to be made include the 
geographic market segment (broad versus sectors, domestic versus international), 
size (large, mid, or small market capitalization), style (value, growth, or blend/core), 
and other constituent characteristics (e.g., high or low momentum, low volatility, and 
quality) that are considered risk factors. These are the same factors discussed earlier 
in equity investment universe segmentation.
The choice of geographic market depends on the investor’s circumstances. The 
investor’s domicile, risk tolerance, liquidity needs, and legal considerations all influ -
ence the decision. For example, the decision will proceed differently for an Indian 
institutional investor than for a US-based individual investor. In India, while there 
are 7,000 listed equity securities, the domestic equity universe is less than one-tenth 
the size of the US equity market by market capitalization, making the Indian investor 
more likely to invest globally. But a domestic investment does not carry with it the 
complexities of cross-border transactions.
Market history and empirical studies show that small-cap stocks tend to be riskier 
and provide a higher long-term return than large-cap stocks, so size is an important 
consideration. To the extent that a benchmark’s return is correlated with this risk 
factor, the benchmark has exposure to the size factor. 
Benchmark Selection 29
Size classifications range from mega-cap to micro-cap. Classifications are not 
limited to individual size categories. For example, many indexes seek to provide equity 
exposure to both small- and mid-cap companies (“smid-cap” indexes). Investors who 
desire exposure across the capitalization spectrum may use an “all-cap” index. Such 
indexes do not necessarily contain all stocks in the market; they usually just combine 
representative stocks from each of the size ranges. Note that a large-cap stock in an 
emerging market may have the same capitalization as a small-cap stock in a developed 
country. Accordingly, index providers usually classify company capitalizations in the 
context of the local market environment.
Equity benchmark selection also involves the investor’s preference for exposure on 
the growth versus value style spectrum. Growth stocks exhibit such characteristics as 
high price momentum, high P/Es, and high EPS growth. Value stocks, however, may 
exhibit high dividend yields, low P/Es, and low price-to-book value ratios. Depending 
on their basic philosophy and market outlook, investors may have a strong preference 
for growth or value.
Exhibit 10  shows the number of available total-return equity indexes in various 
classifications available worldwide. Broad market exposure is provided by nearly 79% 
of all indexes. Developed market indexes are about four times as common as emerging 
market indexes. The majority of total-return global equity indexes cover the all-cap 
space or are otherwise focused on large-cap and mid-cap stocks. total-return global 
equity indexes cover the all-cap space or are otherwise focused on large-cap and 
mid-cap stocks.
Exhibit 10: Characteristics of Total-Return Global Equity 
Indexes
Total-return global equity indexes 14,650
   
Broad market indexes 11,559
Sector indexes 1,171
Not classified 1,920
   
Of the 14,650 total-return global equity market indexes:
Developed markets 8,415
Emerging markets 2,210
Developed and emerging markets 4,006
Not classified 194
   
Of the 14,650 total-return global equity market indexes:
All-cap stocks 6,806
Large-cap stocks 1,038
Large-cap and mid-cap stocks 5,766
Mid-cap stocks 216
Mid-cap and small-cap stocks 132
Small-cap stocks 682
Not classified 10
Source:  Morningstar Direct, October 2021.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 30
Once the investor has settled on the market, capitalization, and style of benchmark, 
the next step is to explore the method used in constructing and maintaining the 
benchmark index.
Index Construction Methodologies
Equity index providers differ in their stock inclusion methods, ranging from exhaustive  
to selective  in their investment universes. Exhaustive stock inclusion strategies are 
those that select every constituent of a universe, while selective approaches target only 
those securities with certain characteristics. The FT Wilshire 5000 Index has perhaps 
the most exhaustive set of constituents in the US market. This market-cap-weighted 
index includes approximately 5,000 publicly traded stocks from across the market-cap 
spectrum. In contrast, the S&P 500 Index embodies a selective approach and aims to 
provide exposure to US large-cap stocks. Its constituent securities are selected using 
a committee process and are based on both size and broad industry affiliation.
The weighting method used in constructing an index influences its performance. 
One of the most common weighting methods is market-cap weighting. Each constit -
uent company’s weight in the index is calculated as its market capitalization divided 
by the total market capitalization of all constituents of the index. In the development 
of the capital asset pricing model, the capitalization-weighted market portfolio is 
mean–variance efficient, meaning that it offers the highest return for a given level of 
risk. To the extent a capitalization-weighted equity index is a reasonable proxy for 
the market portfolio, the tracking portfolio may be close to mean–variance efficient.
A further advantage of the capitalization-weighted approach is that it reflects 
a strategy’s investment capacity. A cap-weighted index can be thought of as a 
liquidity-weighted index because the largest-cap stocks tend to have the highest 
liquidity and the greatest capacity to handle investor flows at a manageable cost. Many 
investor portfolios tend to be biased toward large-cap stocks and use benchmarks 
that reflect that bias.
The most common form of market-cap weighting is free-float weighting, which 
adjusts each constituent’s shares outstanding for closely held shares that are not gener -
ally available to the investing public. The process to determine the free-float-adjusted 
shares outstanding relies on publicly available information to determine the holders 
of the shares and whether those shares would be available for purchase in the mar -
ketplace. One reason to adjust a company’s share count is that strategic holdings 
by governments, affiliated companies, founders, and employees are seldom traded. 
Another less common reason is to account for limitations on foreign ownership of 
a company; these limitations typically represent rules that are generally set up by a 
governmental entity through regulation.
Adjusting a company’s shares outstanding for float can be a complex task and 
often requires an index provider to work with the issuer’s shareholder services unit 
or to rely on analytical judgements. Although all data used in determining a compa -
ny’s free-float-adjusted shares outstanding are public information, the various index 
providers often report a different number of float-adjusted shares outstanding for the 
same security based on methodological differences.
In a price-weighted  index, the weight of each stock is its price per share divided 
by the sum of all share prices in the index. A price-weighted index can be interpreted 
as a portfolio that consists of one share of each constituent company. Although some 
price-weighted indexes, such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nikkei 225, 
have high visibility as indicators of day-to-day market movements, price-weighted 
investment approaches are not commonly used by portfolio managers. A stock split 
for any constituent of the index complicates the index calculation. The weight in the 
index of the stock that split decreases, and the index divisor decreases as well. With 
its divisor changed, the index ceases to be a simple average of the constituent stocks’ 
Benchmark Selection 31
prices. For price-weighted indexes, the assumption that the same number of shares is 
held in each component stock is a shortcoming, because very few market participants 
invest in that way.
Equally weighted  indexes produce the least-concentrated portfolios. Such indexes 
have constituent weights of 1/ n, where n represents the number of stocks in the index. 
Equal weighting of stocks in an index can be considered a naive strategy because it 
does not show preference toward any single stock, but the reduction of single-stock 
concentration risk and slowly changing sector exposures make equal weighting attrac -
tive to many investors.
As noted by Zeng and Luo (2013) , broad market equally weighted indexes are 
factor indifferent and the weighting randomizes factor mispricing. Equal weighting 
also produces higher volatility than cap weighting, one reason being that it imparts 
a small-cap bias to the portfolio. Equal weights deviate from market weights most 
dramatically for large-cap indexes, which contain mega-cap stocks. Constrained 
market-cap ranges, such as those of mid-cap indexes, even if market weighted, tend 
to have relatively uniform weights.
Equally weighted indexes require regular rebalancing because immediately after 
trading in the constituent stocks begins, the weights are no longer equal. Most index 
providers use a regular reweighting schedule. Standard & Poor’s offers the S&P 500 
Index in an equally weighted format and rebalances the index to equal weights once 
each quarter. Therein would appear to lie a misleading aspect of equally weighted 
indexes: For a 91-day quarter, the index is not equally weighted (albeit, modestly so) 
for 90/91 = 99% of the time.
Another drawback of equal weighting is its limited investment capacity. The 
smallest-cap constituents of an equally weighted index may have low liquidity, which 
means that investors cannot purchase a large number of shares without causing price 
changes. Zeng and Luo (2013)  addressed this issue by assuming that 10% of shares 
in the cap-weighted S&P 100 and S&P 500 and 5% of shares in the cap-weighted 
S&P 400 and S&P 600 indexes are currently held in cap-weighted indexing strategies 
without any appreciable liquidity problems. They then focused on the smallest-cap 
constituent of each index as of December 2012, and they determined the value that 
10% (5%) of its market capitalization represents. Finally, they multiplied this amount 
by the number of stocks in the index to estimate the total investment capacity for 
tracking each of the S&P equally weighted equity indexes. Zeng and Luo’s estimates 
are shown in Exhibit 11 .
Exhibit 11: Estimated Investment Capacity of Equally Weighted (EW) Equity 
Indexes
Index Capitalization Category Estimated Capacity
S&P 100 EW Mega-cap USD176 billion
S&P 500 EW Large-cap USD82 billion
S&P 400 EW Mid-cap USD8 billion
S&P 600 EW Small-cap USD2 billion
Source:  Zeng and Luo (2013) .
Qin and Singal (2015)  showed that equally weighted portfolios have a natural advan -
tage over cap-weighted portfolios. To the extent that any of the constituent stocks 
are mispriced, equally weighted portfolios will experience return superiority as the 
stock prices move up or down toward their correct intrinsic value. Because of the 
aforementioned need to rebalance back to equal weights, Qin and Singal found that the 
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 32
advantage largely vanishes when taxes and transaction costs are considered. However, 
based on their results, tax-exempt investors could experience superior returns from 
equal weighting.
Other non-cap-weighted indexes are weighted based on such attributes as a 
company’s or stock’s fundamental characteristics (e.g., sales, income, or dividends). 
Discussed in more detail later, fundamental weighting delinks a constituent stock’s 
portfolio weight from its market value. The philosophy behind fundamental weighting 
is that although stock prices may become over- or undervalued, the market price will 
eventually converge to a level implied by the fundamental attributes.
Market-cap-weighted indexes and fundamentally weighted indexes share attractive 
characteristics, including low cost, rule-based construction, transparency, and invest -
ability. Their philosophies, however, are different. Market-cap-weighted portfolios are 
based on the efficient market hypothesis, while fundamentally weighted indexes look 
to exploit possible inefficiencies in market pricing.
An important concern in benchmark selection relates to how concentrated the index 
is. In this case, the concept of the effective number of stocks, which is an indication of 
portfolio concentration, can provide important information. An index that has a high 
degree of stock concentration or a low effective number of stocks may be relatively 
undiversified. Woerheide and Persson (1993)  showed that the Herfindahl–Hirschman 
Index (HHI) is a valid measure of stock-concentration risk in a portfolio, and Hannam 
and Jamet (2017)  demonstrated its use by practitioners. The HHI is calculated as the 
sum of the constituent weightings squared, as shown in Equation 1 :
  HHI =  ∑ i=1  n
     w  i  2 ,  (1)
where wi is the weight of stock i in the portfolio.
The HHI can range in value from 1/ n, where n is equal to the number of securities 
held, to 1.0. An HHI of 1/ n would signify an equally weighted portfolio, and a value 
of 1.0 would signify portfolio concentration in a single security.
Using the HHI, one can estimate the effective (or equivalent) number of stocks, 
held in equal weights, that would mimic the concentration level of the chosen index. 
The effective number of stocks for a portfolio is calculated as the reciprocal of the 
HHI, as shown in Equation 2 :
  Effective number of stocks  =   1 _ 
 ∑ i=1  n
    w  i  2     = 1 / HHI.  (2)
Malevergne, Santa-Clara, and Sornette (2009)  demonstrated that cap-weighted indexes 
have a surprisingly low effective number of stocks. Consider the NASDAQ 100, a 
US-based market-cap-weighted index consisting of 100 stocks. If the index were 
weighted uniformly, each stock’s weight would be 0.01 (1%). In May 2017, the con -
stituent weights ranged from 0.123 for Apple, Inc., to 0.0016 for Liberty Global plc—a 
ratio of 77:1. Weights for the top five stocks totaled almost 0.38 (38%), a significant 
allocation to those securities. Across all stocks in the index, the median weight was 
0.0039 (that is, 0.39%). The effective number of stocks can be estimated by squaring 
the weights for the stocks, summing the results, and calculating the reciprocal of 
that figure. The squared weights for the NASDAQ 100 stocks summed to 0.0404, the 
reciprocal of which is 1/0.0404 = 24.75, the effective number of stocks. Thus, the 100 
stocks in the index had a concentration level that can be thought of as being equivalent 
to approximately 25 stocks held in equal weights.
Benchmark Selection 33
EFFECTIVE NUMBER OF STOCKS
1. A market-cap-weighted index contains 50 stocks. The five larg -
est-cap stocks have weights of 0.089, 0.080, 0.065, 0.059, and 0.053. The 
bottom 45 stocks represent the remaining weight of 0.654, and the sum of 
the squares of those weights is 0.01405. What are the portfolio’s Herfindahl–
Hirschman Index and effective number of stocks held?
Solution
The stocks, their weights, and their squared weights are shown in Exhibit 12 .
Exhibit 12: Calculations for Effective Number of Stocks
 
Stock Weight Squared Weight
1 0.089 0.00792
2 0.080 0.00640
3 0.065 0.00423
4 0.059 0.00348
5 0.053 0.00281
Stocks 6–50 0.654 Sum of squared weights for Stocks 
6–50: 0.01405
Total for Stocks 1–50 1.000 0.03889
 
The HHI is shown in the final row: 0.03889. The reciprocal of the HHI is 
1/0.03889 = 25.71. Thus, the effective number of stocks is approximately 26. 
The fact that the portfolio weights are far from being a uniform 2% across 
the 50 stocks makes the effective number of stocks held in equal weights less 
than 26.
The stock market crises of 2000 and 2007 brought heightened attention to 
investment strategies that are defensive or volatility reducing. For example, some 
income-oriented investors are drawn to strategies that weight benchmark constit -
uents based on the dividend yield of each stock. Volatility weighting calculates the 
volatility of each constituent stock and weights the index based on the inverse of each 
stock’s relative volatility. A related method produces a minimum-variance index using 
mean–variance optimization.
Exhibit 13  shows the various methods for weighting the constituent securities of 
broad-based, non-industry-sector, total-return global equity indexes.
Exhibit 13: Equity Index Constituent Weighting Methods
Weighting Method Number of Indexes
Market-cap, free-float adjusted 11,211
Market-cap weighted 1,362
Multi-factor weighted 442
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 34
Weighting Method Number of Indexes
Equal weighted 715
Dividend weighted 357
Source:  Morningstar Direct, October 2021.
Another consideration in how an index is constructed involves its periodic rebalanc -
ing and reconstitution schedule. Reconstitution of an index frequently involves the 
addition and deletion of index constituents, while rebalancing refers to the periodic 
reweighting of those constituents. Index reconstitution and rebalancing create turn -
over. The turnover for developed-market, large-cap indexes that are infrequently 
reconstituted tends to be low, while benchmarks constructed using stock selection 
rather than exhaustive inclusion have higher turnover. As seen in Exhibit 14 , both 
rebalancing and reconstitution occur with varied frequency, although the former is 
slightly more frequent.
Exhibit 14: Index Rebalancing/Reconstitution Frequency 
for Broad Global Equity Market Total-Return Indexes
Frequency Rebalancing Reconstitution
Daily 18 25
Monthly 624 42
Quarterly 9,354 4,389
Semi-annually 1,328 6,235
Annually 2,925 3,102
As needed 147 33
Note:  The totals for the Rebalancing and Reconstitution columns differ slightly, as does the index total in 
Exhibit 14 .
Source:  Morningstar Direct, October 2021.
The method of reconstitution may produce additional effects. When reconstitution 
occurs, index-tracking portfolios, mutual funds, and ETFs will want to hold the newly 
included names and sell the deleted names. The demand created by investors seeking 
to track an index can push up the stock prices of added companies while depressing 
the prices of the deleted ones. Research shows that this produces a significant price 
effect in each case. Depending on the reconstitution method used by index publishers, 
arbitrageurs may be able to anticipate the changes and front-run the trades that will 
be made by index-based managers. In some cases, the index rules are written such 
that the decision to add or remove an index constituent is voted on by a committee 
maintained by the index provider. Where a committee makes the final decision, the 
changes become difficult to guess ahead of time. In other cases, investors know the 
precise method used for reconstitution, so guessing is often successful.
Chen, Noronha, and Singal (2004)  found that constituent changes for indexes 
that reconstitute using subjective criteria are often more difficult for arbitrageurs 
to predict than indexes that use objective criteria. Even indexes that use objective 
criteria for reconstitution often announce the changes several weeks before they are 
implemented. Stocks near the breakpoint between small-cap and large-cap indexes 
are especially vulnerable to reconstitution-induced price changes. The smallest-cap 
stocks in the Russell 1000 large-cap index have a low weight in that cap-weighted index. 
After any of those stocks are demoted to the Russell 2000 small-cap index, they are 
likely to have some of the highest weights. Petajisto (2010)  showed that the process of 
Benchmark Selection 35
moving in that direction tends to be associated with increases in stock prices, while 
movements into the large-cap index tend to have negative effects. He also concluded 
that transparency in reconstitution is a virtue rather than a drawback.
A final consideration is investability. As stated earlier, an effective benchmark 
must be investable in that its constituent stocks are available for timely purchase in 
a liquid trading environment. Indexes that represent the performance of a market 
segment that is not available for direct ownership by investors must be replicated 
through derivative strategies, which, for reasons explained later in the curriculum, 
may be sub-optimal for many investors.
SUMMARY
 ■Equities can play several roles in an overall portfolio, including providing 
such benefits as capital appreciation, dividend income, diversification with 
other asset classes, and a potential hedge against inflation.
 ■The inclusion of equities in a portfolio can be driven by a client’s goals or 
needs. Portfolio managers often consider the following investment objec -
tives and constraints when deciding to include equities (or asset classes in 
general, for that matter) in a client’s portfolio: risk objective , return objective , 
liquidity requirement , time horizon , tax concerns , legal and regulatory fac -
tors, and unique circumstances .
 ■Investors often segment the equity universe according to (1) size and style, 
(2) geography, and (3) economic activity.
 ■Sources of equity portfolio income include dividends, securities lending 
fees and interest, dividend capture, covered calls, and cash-covered puts (or 
cash-secured puts).
 ■Sources of equity portfolio costs include management fees, performance 
fees, administration fees, marketing/distribution fees, and trading costs.
 ■Shareholder engagement is the process whereby companies engage with 
their shareholders. The process typically includes voting on corporate mat -
ters at general meetings and other forms of communication, such as quar -
terly investor calls or in-person meetings.
 ■Shareholder engagement can provide benefits for both shareholders and 
companies. From a company’s perspective, shareholder engagement can 
assist in developing a more effective corporate governance culture. In turn, 
shareholder engagement may lead to better company performance to the 
benefit of shareholders (as well as other stakeholders).
 ■Disadvantages of shareholder engagement include costs and time involved, 
pressure on a company to meet near-term share price or earnings targets, 
possible selective disclosure of information, and potential conflicts of 
interest.
 ■Activist investors (or activists) specialize in taking stakes in companies and 
creating change to generate a gain on the investment.
 ■The participation of shareholders in general meetings, also known as general 
assemblies, and the exercise of their voting rights are among the most influ -
ential tools available for shareholder engagement.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 36
 ■The choice of using active or index-based management is not an “either/or” 
(binary) decision. Investors may decide to position their portfolios across 
the active management spectrum based on their confidence in outperform -
ing, client preference, suitable benchmarks, client-specific mandates, risks/
costs of active management, and taxes.
 ■Many active equity portfolio managers are unsuccessful at beating bench -
marks and have charged high management fees. Consequently, index-based 
strategies have increased in popularity.
 ■Selection of a benchmark is driven by the equity investor’s objectives and 
constraints as presented in the investment policy statement. The benchmark 
index must be rule-based, transparent, and investable. Specific important 
characteristics include the domestic or foreign market covered, the market 
capitalization of the constituent stocks, where the index falls in the value–
growth spectrum, and other risk factors.
 ■The equity benchmark index weighting scheme is another important con -
sideration for investors. Weighting methods include market-cap weighting, 
price weighting, equal weighting, and fundamental weighting. Market-cap 
weighting has several advantages, including the fact that weights adjust 
automatically.
 ■Index rebalancing and reconstitution policies are important features. 
Rebalancing involves adjusting the portfolio’s constituent weights after price 
changes, mergers, or other corporate events have caused those weights to 
deviate from the benchmark index. Reconstitution involves deleting names 
that are no longer in the index and adding names that have been approved 
as new index members.
References 37
REFERENCES
Brinson, Gary P ., L. Randolph Hood, and Gilbert L. Beebower. 1986. “Determinants of Portfolio 
Performance. ” Financial Analysts Journal  42 (4): 39–44.
Chen, Honghui, Gregory Noronha, and Vijay Singal. 2004. “The Price Response to S&P 500 
Index Additions and Deletions: Evidence of Asymmetry and a New Explanation. ” Journal of 
Finance  59 (4): 1901–30.
French, Kenneth R. 2008. “Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing. ” Journal of 
Finance  63 (4): 1537–1573.
GSIA. 2020. “Global Sustainable Investment Review 2020. ” www  .gsi -alliance  .org/  .
Hannam, Richard and Frédéric Jamet. 2017. “IQ Insights: Equal Weighting and Other Forms of 
Size Tilting. ” SSGA white paper (January).
Kaplan, Steven, Tobias Moskowitz, and Berk Sensoy. 2013. “The Effects of Stock Lending on 
Security Prices: An Experiment. ” Journal of Finance  68 (5): 1891–936.
Malevergne, Yannick, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Didier Sornette. 2009. “Professor Zipf Goes to 
Wall Street. ” Working Paper Series (National Bureau of Economic Research)15295 (August).
Petajisto, Antti. 2010. “The Index Premium and Its Hidden Cost for Index Funds. ” Working 
paper, NYU Stern.
Qin, Nan and Vijay Singal. 2015. “Investor Portfolios When Stocks Are Mispriced: 
Equally-Weighted or Value-Weighted?” Working paper, Virginia Tech.
Renshaw, Edward F. and Paul J. Feldstein. 1960. “The Case for an Unmanaged Investment 
Company. ” Financial Analysts Journal  16 (1): 43–46.
Woerheide, Walt. and Don Persson. 1993. “ An Index of Portfolio Diversification. ” Financial 
Services Review  2 (2): 73–85.
Zeng, Liu and Frank Luo. 2013. “10 Years Later: Where in the World Is Equal Weight Indexing 
Now?” White paper, Standard & Poor’s.
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 38
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions 
1-8
Three years ago, the Albright Investment Management Company (Albright) add -
ed four new funds—the Barboa Fund, the Caribou Fund, the DoGood Fund, and 
the Elmer Fund—to its existing fund offering. Albright’s new funds are described 
in Exhibit 1 .
Exhibit 1: Albright Investment Management Company New Funds
Fund Fund Description
Barboa Fund Invests solely in the equity of companies in oil production and trans -
portation industries in many countries.
Caribou Fund Uses an aggressive strategy focusing on relatively new, fast-growing 
companies in emerging industries.
DoGood Fund Investment universe includes all US companies and sectors that have 
favorable environmental, social, and governance (ESG) ratings and 
specifically excludes companies with products or services related to 
aerospace and defense.
Elmer Fund Investments selected to track the S&P 500 Index. Minimizes trading 
based on the assumption that markets are efficient.
Hans Smith, an Albright portfolio manager, makes the following notes after ex -
amining these funds:
Note 1 The fee on the Caribou Fund is a 15% share of any capital apprecia -
tion above a 7% threshold and the use of a high-water mark.
Note 2 The DoGood Fund invests in Fleeker Corporation stock, which is 
highly rated in the ESG space, and Fleeker’s pension fund has a signif -
icant investment in the DoGood Fund. This dynamic has the poten -
tial for a conflict of interest on the part of Fleeker Corporation but 
not for the DoGood Fund.
Note 3 The DoGood Fund’s portfolio manager has written policies stating 
that the fund does not engage in shareholder activism. Therefore, 
the DoGood Fund may be a free rider on the activism by these 
shareholders.
Note 4 Of the four funds, the Elmer Fund is most likely to appeal to investors 
who want to minimize fees and believe that the market is efficient.
Note 5 Adding investment-grade bonds to the Elmer Fund will decrease the 
portfolio’s short-term risk.
Smith discusses means of enhancing income for the three funds with the junior 
analyst, Kolton Frey, including engaging in securities lending or writing covered 
calls. Frey tells Smith the following:
Practice Problems 39
Statement 1 Securities lending would increase income through reinvestment 
of the cash collateral but would require the fund to miss out on 
dividend income from the lent securities.
Statement 2 Writing covered calls would generate income, but doing so 
would limit the upside share price appreciation for the underly -
ing shares.
1. The Barboa Fund can be best described as a fund segmented by:
A. size/style.
B. geography.
C. economic activity.
2. The Caribou Fund is most likely  classified as a:
A. large-cap value fund.
B. small-cap value fund.
C. small-cap growth fund.
3. The DoGood Fund’s approach to the aerospace and defense industry is best de-
scribed as:
A. positive screening.
B. negative screening.
C. thematic investing.
4. The Elmer fund’s management strategy is:
A. active.
B. index.
C. blended.
5. Based on Note 1, the fee on the Caribou Fund is best described as a:
A. performance fee.
B. management fee.
C. administrative fee.
6. Which of the following notes about the DoGood Fund is correct?
A. Only Note 2
B. Only Note 3
C. Both Note 2 and Note 3
7. Which of the notes regarding the Elmer Fund is correct?
A. Only Note 4
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 40
B. Only Note 5
C. Both Note 4 and Note 5
8. Which of Frey’s statements about securities lending and covered call writing is 
correct?
A. Only Statement 1
B. Only Statement 2
C. Both Statement 1 and Statement 2
The following information relates to questions 
9-11
Evan Winthrop, a senior officer of a US-based corporation, meets with Rebecca 
Tong, a portfolio manager at Cobalt Wealth Management. Winthrop recently 
moved his investments to Cobalt in response to his previous manager’s relative 
underperformance and high expenses.
Winthrop resides in Canada and plans to retire there. His annual salary covers his 
current spending needs, and his vested defined benefit pension plan is sufficient 
to meet retirement income goals. Winthrop desires exposure to global equity 
markets with a focus on low management costs and minimal tracking error to 
any index benchmarks. The fixed-income portion of the portfolio may consist of 
laddered maturities with a home-country bias.
Tong proposes using an index-based equity strategy and reviews the most im -
portant requirements for an appropriate benchmark. With regard to investable 
indexes, Tong tells Winthrop the following:
Statement 1 A free-float adjustment to a market-capitalization-weighted 
index lowers its liquidity.
Statement 2 An index provider that incorporates a buffering policy makes 
the index more investable.
Winthrop asks Tong to select a benchmark for the equity allocation that holds all 
sectors of the Canadian equity market and to focus the portfolio on highly liquid, 
well-known companies. In addition, Winthrop specifies that any stock purchased 
should have a relatively low beta, a high dividend yield, a low P/E, and a low 
price-to-book ratio (P/B).
9. Which of Tong’s statements regarding equity index benchmarks is correct?
A. Only Statement 1
B. Only Statement 2
C. Both Statement 1 and Statement 2
10. To satisfy Winthrop’s benchmark and security selection specifications, the equity 
index benchmark Tong selects should be:
A. small capitalization with a core tilt.
B. large capitalization with a value tilt.
Practice Problems 41
C. mid-capitalization with a growth tilt.
11. What is a problem with Winthrop’s benchmark preference?
A. The geographic limitation to Canadian equities
B. The exclusion of fixed-income securities given Winthrop’s significant 
exposure
C. The inclusion of all sectors 
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 42
SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. The Barboa Fund invests solely in the equity of companies in the oil 
production and transportation industries in many countries. The fund’s descrip -
tion is consistent with the production-oriented approach, which groups compa -
nies that manufacture similar products or use similar inputs in their manufactur -
ing processes.
A is incorrect because the fund description does not mention the firms’ size or 
style (i.e., value, growth, or blend). Size is typically measured by market capital -
ization and often categorized as large cap, mid-cap, or small cap. Style is typically 
classified as value, growth, or a blend of value and growth. In addition, style is 
often determined through a “scoring” system that incorporates multiple metrics 
or ratios, such as price-to-book ratios, price-to-earnings ratios, earnings growth, 
dividend yield, and book value growth. These metrics are then typically “scored” 
individually for each company, assigned certain weights, and then aggregated.
B is incorrect because the fund is invested in many countries, which indicates 
that the fund is not segmented by geography. Segmentation by geography is typ -
ically based on the stage of countries’ macroeconomic development and wealth. 
Common geographic categories are developed markets, emerging markets, and 
frontier markets.
2. C is correct because the fund focuses on new companies that are generally classi -
fied as small firms, and the fund has a style classified as aggressive. A widely used 
approach to segment the equity universe incorporates two factors: size and style. 
Size is typically measured by market capitalization and often categorized as large 
cap, mid-cap, or small cap. Style is typically classified as value, growth, or a blend 
of value and growth.
3. B is correct. The DoGood fund excludes companies based on specified activities 
(e.g., aerospace and defense), which is a process of negative screening. Negative, 
or exclusionary, screening refers to the practice of excluding certain sectors or 
companies that deviate from accepted standards in such areas as human rights or 
environmental concerns.
A is incorrect because positive screening attempts to identify companies or sec -
tors that score most favorably regarding ESG-related risks and/or opportunities. 
The restrictions on investing indicate that a negative screen is established.
C is incorrect because thematic investing focuses on investing in companies in a 
specific sector or following a specific theme, such as energy efficiency or climate 
change. The DoGood Fund’s investment universe includes all companies and 
sectors that have favorable ESG ratings (no specific sectors or screens) but with 
specific exclusions.
4. B is correct. The fund is managed under the assumption that the market is 
efficient, and investments are selected to mimic an index. Compared with active 
strategies, index strategies generally have lower turnover and generate a higher 
percentage of long-term gains. An index fund that replicates its benchmark can 
have minimal rebalancing.
5. A is correct. Performance fees serve as an incentive for portfolio managers to 
achieve or outperform return objectives, to the benefit of both the manager and 
investors. Several performance fee structures exist, although performance fees 
tend to be “upward only”; that is, fees are earned by the manager when perfor -
mance objectives are met, but fund investors are not reimbursed when perfor -
mance is negative. Performance fees could be reduced, however, following a 
Solutions 43
period of poor performance. Fee calculations also reflect high-water marks. As 
described in Note 1, the fee for the Caribou Fund is a 15% share of any capital 
appreciation above a 7% threshold, with the use of a high-water mark, and is 
therefore a performance fee.
B is incorrect because management fees include direct costs of research (such as 
remuneration and expenses for investment analysts and portfolio managers) and 
the direct costs of portfolio management (e.g., software, trade processing costs, 
and compliance). Management fees are typically determined as a percentage of 
the funds under management.
C is incorrect because administrative fees include the processing of corporate 
actions, such as rights issues and optional stock dividends; the measurement of 
performance and risk of a portfolio; and voting at company meetings. Generally, 
these functions are provided by an investment management firm itself and are 
included as part of the management fee.
6. B is correct because the fund becomes a free rider if it allows other sharehold -
ers to engage in actions that benefit the fund, and therefore Note 3 is correct. 
Investors benefit from the shareholder engagement of others under the so-called 
free-rider problem. Specifically, assume that a portfolio manager using an active 
strategy actively engages with a company to improve its operations and was 
successful in increasing the company’s stock price. The manager’s actions in this 
case improved the value of his portfolio and also benefited other investors that 
own the same stock in their portfolios. Those investors that did not participate 
in shareholder engagement benefit from improved performance but without the 
costs necessary for engagement.
Note 2 is incorrect because a conflict of interest arises on the part of the DoGood 
Fund if it owns shares of a company that invests in the fund. Conflicts of interest 
can result for a company. For example, a portfolio manager could engage with a 
company that also happens to be an investor in the manager’s portfolio. In such 
a situation, a portfolio manager may be unduly influenced to support the compa -
ny’s management so as not to jeopardize the company’s investment mandate with 
the portfolio manager.
7. A is correct. For index-based portfolios, management fees are typically low 
because of lower direct costs of research and portfolio management relative to 
actively managed portfolios. Therefore, Note 4 is correct.
Note 5 is incorrect because the predictability of correlations is uncertain.
8. B is correct. Writing covered calls also generates additional income for an equity 
portfolio, but doing so limits the upside from share price appreciation of the 
underlying shares. Therefore, Statement 2 is correct.
A is incorrect because dividends on loaned stock are “manufactured” by the stock 
borrower for the stock lender; that is, the stock borrower ensures that the stock 
lender is compensated for any dividends that the lender would have received had 
the stock not been loaned. Therefore, Statement 1 is incorrect. Frey is incorrect 
in stating that the funds would miss out on dividend income on lent securities.
9. B is correct. The three requirements for an index to become the basis for an equi -
ty investment strategy are that the index be (a) rule based, (b) transparent, and (c) 
investable. Buffering makes index benchmarks more investable (Statement 2) by 
making index transitions a more gradual and orderly process.
A is incorrect because basing the index weight of an individual security solely 
on the total number of shares outstanding without using a free-float adjustment 
may make the index less investable. If a stock market cap excludes shares held by 
founders, governments, or other companies, then the remaining shares more ac -
Learning Module 1 Overview of Equity Portfolio Management 44
curately reflect the stock’s true liquidity. Thus a free-float adjustment (Statement 
1) to a market index more accurately reflects its actual liquidity (it does not lower 
its liquidity). Many indexes require that individual stocks have float and average 
shares traded above a certain percentage of shares outstanding.
10. B is correct. To address Winthrop’s concerns (sector diversification, liquidity, risk, 
dividend yield, P/E, and P/B), the benchmark should consist of large-capitaliza -
tion stocks with a value tilt. A large-capitalization index contains the largest-cap 
stocks, which tend to have the highest liquidity. Value stocks tend to exhibit high 
dividend yields and low P/E and P/B ratios.
A is incorrect because small-capitalization stocks tend to be riskier than 
large-capitalization stocks. Winthrop has a preference for low-beta (low-risk) 
stocks.
C is incorrect because a growth index will not address Winthrop’s preference for 
a low P/E. Growth stocks exhibit such characteristics as high price momentum, 
high P/Es, and high EPS growth.
11. A is correct. Winthrop desires exposure to global equity markets, so the equity 
benchmark should be global as well—for example, the MSCI All Country World 
Index.
B is incorrect because Winthrop was stating a preference for the benchmark for 
his equity allocation. Including fixed income would be inappropriate.
C is incorrect because including all sectors is appropriate because his investment 
strategy includes all sectors. 
Overview of Fixed-Income 
Portfolio Management
by Bernd Hanke, PhD, CFA, and Brian J. Henderson, PhD, CFA.
Bernd Hanke, PhD, CFA, is at Global Systematic Investors LLP (United Kingdom). Brian J. 
Henderson, PhD, CFA, is at the George Washington University (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
discuss roles of fixed-income securities in portfolios and how 
fixed-income mandates may be classified
describe fixed-income portfolio measures of risk and return as well 
as correlation characteristics
describe bond market liquidity, including the differences among 
market sub-sectors, and discuss the effect of liquidity on 
fixed-income portfolio management
describe and interpret a model for fixed-income returns
discuss the use of leverage, alternative methods for leveraging, and 
risks that leverage creates in fixed-income portfolios
discuss differences in managing fixed-income portfolios for taxable 
and tax-exempt investors
describe liability-driven investing 
describe the strategy of cash flow matching
describe construction, benefits, limitations, and risk–return 
characteristics of a laddered bond portfolio
INTRODUCTION
Investors often seek regular income from their investments as well as a predetermined 
date when their capital will be returned. Fixed-income investments offer both.
Fixed-income instruments include a broad range of publicly traded securities 
(such as commercial paper, notes, and bonds traded through exchanges as well as 
OTC) and non-publicly traded instruments (such as loans and private placements). 
Individual loans or fixed-income obligations may be bundled into a pool of assets sup -
porting such instruments as asset-backed securities and covered bonds. Fixed-income 1LEARNING MODULE
2
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 46
portfolio managers combine these diverse instruments across issuers, maturities, and 
jurisdictions to meet the various needs of investors. We discuss the different roles of 
fixed-income securities in portfolios and explain the two main types of fixed-income 
mandates—liability-based mandates and total return mandates—as well as bond 
market liquidity. We also provide an overview of portfolio measures, instruments, 
and vehicles used in fixed-income portfolio management and introduce a model of 
how a bond position’s total expected return can be decomposed.
We explain liability-driven investing in fixed-income investing by demonstrating 
how to best structure a fixed-income portfolio when considering both the asset and 
liability sides of the investor’s balance sheet. We introduce the idea of structuring a 
bond portfolio to match the future cash liabilities that have bond-like characteristics. 
Asset–liability management (ALM) strategies are based on the concept that investors 
incorporate both rate-sensitive assets and liabilities into the portfolio decision-making 
process. When the liabilities are given and assets are managed, liability-driven invest -
ing (LDI), a common type of ALM strategy, may be used to ensure adequate funding 
for an insurance portfolio, a pension plan, or an individual’s budget after retirement. 
The techniques and risks associated with LDI are introduced and then expanded to 
cover both cash flow and duration-matching techniques and multiple liabilities. This 
strategy, known as immunization, may be viewed simply as a special case of interest 
rate hedging.  
ROLES OF FIXED-INCOME SECURITIES IN 
PORTFOLIOS
discuss roles of fixed-income securities in portfolios and how 
fixed-income mandates may be classified
Fixed-income securities serve important roles in investment portfolios, including 
diversification, regular cash flows, and possible inflation hedging. We will briefly 
review the roles in turn.
Diversification Benefits
Fixed-income investments can provide diversification benefits when combined with 
other asset classes in a portfolio. Recall that a major reason portfolios can effectively 
reduce risk is that combining securities whose returns are not perfectly correlated 
(i.e., a correlation coefficient of less than +1.0) provides risk diversification. Lower 
correlations are associated with higher diversification benefits and lower risk. The 
challenge in diversifying risk is to find assets with correlations much lower than +1.0.
Correlations between fixed-income and equity securities vary, but adding 
fixed-income exposure to portfolios that include equity securities is usually an effec -
tive way to obtain diversification benefits. Fixed-income investments may also provide 
risk reduction because of their low correlations with other asset classes, such as real 
estate and commodities. Exhibit 1  shows the correlation between the S&P 500 Index 
and various fixed-income categories based on total returns (monthly) over a 20-year 
period ending in December 2019.2
Roles of Fixed-Income Securities in Portfolios 47
Exhibit 1: Total Return Correlations between US Fixed Income and Equities
  Fixed-Income Indexes
US 
Aggregate10Y US 
TreasuryUS Corpo -
rate BondsGlobal 
AggregateUS 
TIPSUS 
High 
YieldEmerging 
Market 
(USD)
S&P 
500–0.09 –0.30 0.20 0.15 0.02 0.63 0.51
Note:  Bloomberg Barclays Indices are shown.
Source:  Bloomberg.
Exhibit 2  shows the divergent performance of US equities and bonds from the end of 
2019 to the end of March 2020. For example, bonds outperformed equities amid the 
fears over the global COVID-19 pandemic in Q1 2020.
Exhibit 2: Returns of S&P 500 vs. 10-Y ear Treasuries, 12 December 2019–31 
March 2020
S&P 500
3,6003,600
3,4003,400
3,2003,200
2,6002,6002,8002,8003,0003,000
2,4002,400
2,2002,200
2,0002,00010 Year Treasury
114114
110110
106106
102102
9898
9696
9494112112
108108
104104
100100
9292
12/20/1912/20/19 1/20/201/20/20 2/20/202/20/20 3/20/203/20/20
S&P 500 (left axis) 10-Year Treasury  (right axis)
Note:  Daily data; constant-maturity 10-year Treasuries used.
Within the fixed-income asset class, the correlation between fixed-income indexes 
will be driven largely by the interest rate component (i.e., duration) and by geography. 
Rate changes can explain a significant amount of movement in fixed-income securities 
prices. The credit component or credit spread will likely result in diversification given 
differences in sectors, credit quality, and geography. For example, investment-grade 
securities may exhibit less correlation with below-investment-grade securities and 
with emerging market securities and equities. The rate component of the return can 
be isolated by calculating correlations using excess returns (this is more meaningful 
when evaluating returns across fixed-income sectors). Exhibit 3  shows correlations 
on an excess return basis between various fixed-income indexes.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 48
Exhibit 3: Excess Return Correlations of Barclays Bloomberg Indices over a 
20-Y ear Period
 US 
AggregateUS 
CorporateGlobal 
AggregateUS High 
YieldEmerging 
Market 
(USD)
US Aggregate 1.00
US Corporate 0.93 1.00
Global Aggregate 0.88 0.86 1.00
US High Yield 0.86 0.84 0.76 1.00
Emerging Market 
(USD)0.79 0.76 0.74 0.80 1.00
Notes:  Bloomberg Barclays Indices shown. Based on monthly data over 20 years ending December 2019.
Source:  Bloomberg.
Importantly, correlations are not constant over time. During a long historical period, 
the average correlation of returns between two asset classes may be low, but in any 
period, the correlation can differ from the average correlation. During periods of 
market stress, investors may exhibit a “flight to quality” by buying safer assets, such as 
government bonds (increasing their prices), and selling riskier assets, such as equity 
securities and high-yield bonds (lowering their prices). These actions may decrease 
the correlation between government bonds and equity securities, as well as between 
government bonds and high-yield bonds. At the same time, the correlation between 
riskier assets, such as equity securities and high-yield bonds, may increase.
Note that similar to correlations, volatility (standard deviation) of asset class 
returns may also vary over time. If interest rate volatility increases, bonds, particu -
larly those with long maturities, can exhibit higher near-term volatility relative to the 
average volatility over a long historical period. The standard deviation of returns for 
lower-credit-quality (high-yield) bonds can rise significantly during times of finan -
cial stress because as credit quality declines and the probability of default increases, 
investors often view these bonds as being more similar to equities.
Exhibit 4  shows the annual returns of the S&P 500 versus the Bloomberg Barclays 
US Corporate High Yield Index over a 20-year period ending in December 2019. It 
illustrates how the fixed-income sector and equities can behave in a similar way. Recall 
that both asset classes are strongly linked to the issuer’s business performance and 
fundamentals. Over the 20-year period, the average return was 7.96% and 6.26% for 
the high-yield index and the S&P 500, respectively, and the standard deviation was 
15.54% and 17.02%, respectively. The correlation was 0.69.
Roles of Fixed-Income Securities in Portfolios 49
Exhibit 4: Relationship between S&P 500 and High-Yield Returns
Percentage (%)
6060
5050
4040
1010
–10–10
–20–20
–30–3020203030
00
–40–40
11/199911/1999 11/201911/2019High- Yield Inde x
S&P 500
Benefits of Regular Cash Flows
Fixed-income investments typically produce regular cash flows for a portfolio. Regular 
cash flows allow investors—both individual and institutional—to meet known future 
obligations, such as tuition payments, pension obligations, and payouts on life insur -
ance policies. In these cases, future liabilities can be estimated with some reasonable 
certainty. Fixed-income securities are often acquired and “dedicated” to funding those 
future liabilities. In dedicated portfolios, fixed-income securities are selected with cash 
flows matching the timing and magnitude of projected future liabilities.
It is important to note that reliance on regular cash flows assumes that no credit 
event (such as an issuer missing a scheduled interest or principal payment) or other 
market events (such as a decrease in interest rates that causes an increase in prepay -
ments of mortgages underlying mortgage-backed securities) will occur. These events 
may cause actual cash flows of fixed-income securities to differ from expected cash 
flows. If any credit or market event occurs or is forecasted to occur, a portfolio man -
ager may need to adjust the portfolio.
Inflation-Hedging Potential
Some fixed-income securities can provide a hedge for inflation. Bonds with floating-rate 
coupons can protect interest income from inflation because the market reference rate 
should adjust for inflation over time. The principal payment at maturity is unadjusted 
for inflation. Inflation-linked bonds provide investors with valuable inflation-hedging 
benefits by paying a return that is directly linked to an index of consumer prices and 
adjusting the principal for inflation. The return on inflation-linked bonds, therefore, 
includes a real return plus an additional component that is tied directly to the infla -
tion rate. All else equal, inflation-linked bonds typically exhibit lower return volatil -
ity than conventional bonds and equities do because the volatility of the returns on 
inflation-linked bonds depends on the volatility of real, rather than nominal , interest 
rates. The volatility of real interest rates is typically lower than the volatility of nominal 
interest rates that drive the returns of conventional bonds and equities.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 50
Many governments in developed countries and some in developing countries have 
issued inflation-linked bonds, as have financial and non-financial corporate issuers. 
For investors with long investment horizons, especially institutions facing long-term 
liabilities (for example, defined benefit pension plans and life insurance companies), 
inflation-linked bonds are particularly useful.
Adding inflation-indexed bonds to diversified portfolios of bonds and equities 
typically results in superior risk-adjusted real portfolio returns. This improvement 
occurs because inflation-linked bonds can effectively represent a separate asset class 
since they offer returns that differ from those of other asset classes and add to market 
completeness. Introducing inflation-linked bonds to an asset allocation strategy can 
result in a superior mean–variance-efficient frontier.
ADDING FIXED-INCOME SECURITIES TO A PORTFOLIO
Mary is anxious about the level of risk in her portfolio because of a 
recent period of increased equity market volatility. Most of her wealth 
is invested in a diversified global equity portfolio.
She contacts two wealth management firms (Firm A and Firm B) for advice. 
In her conversations with each adviser, she expresses her desire to reduce her 
portfolio’s risk and to have a portfolio that generates a cash flow stream with 
consistent purchasing power over her 15-year investment horizon.
The correlation coefficient of Mary’s diversified global equity portfolio 
with a diversified fixed-coupon bond portfolio is –0.10 and with a diversified 
inflation-linked bond portfolio is 0.10. The correlation coefficient between a 
diversified fixed-coupon bond portfolio and a diversified inflation-linked bond 
portfolio is 0.65.
The adviser from Firm A suggests diversifying half of her investment assets 
into nominal fixed-coupon bonds. The adviser from Firm B also suggests diver -
sification but recommends that Mary invest 25% of her investment assets in 
fixed-coupon bonds and 25% in inflation-linked bonds.
1. Evaluate the advice given to Mary by each adviser based on her stated de -
sires regarding portfolio risk reduction and cash flow stream. Recommend 
which advice Mary should follow, making sure to discuss the following 
concepts in your answer: 
a. Diversification benefits
b. Cash flow benefits
c. Inflation-hedging benefits
Solution
Advice from Firm A:
Diversifying into fixed-coupon bonds would offer substantial diversifica -
tion benefits in lowering overall portfolio volatility (risk) given the negative 
correlation of –0.10. The portfolio’s volatility, measured by standard devi -
ation, would be lower than the weighted sum of standard deviations of the 
diversified global equity portfolio and the diversified fixed-coupon bond 
portfolio. The portfolio will generate regular cash flows because it includes 
fixed-coupon bonds. This advice, however, does not address Mary’s desire to 
have the cash flows maintain purchasing power over time and thus serve as 
an inflation hedge.
Advice from Firm B:
Diversifying into both fixed-coupon bonds and inflation-linked bonds offers 
additional diversification benefits beyond that offered by fixed-coupon 
Roles of Fixed-Income Securities in Portfolios 51
bonds only. The correlation between diversified global equities and infla -
tion-linked bonds is only 0.10. The correlation between nominal fixed-cou -
pon bonds and inflation-linked bonds is 0.65, which is also less than 1.0. 
The portfolio will generate regular cash flows because of the inclusion of 
fixed-coupon and inflation-linked bonds. Adding the inflation-linked bonds 
helps at least partially address Mary’s desire for consistent purchasing power 
over her investment horizon.
Which Advice to Choose:
Based on her stated desires and the analysis given, Mary should follow the 
advice provided by Firm B.
Classifying Fixed-Income Mandates
The previous section covered the roles of fixed-income securities in portfolios and the 
benefits these securities provide. When investment mandates include an allocation to 
fixed income, investors need to decide how to add fixed-income securities to portfolios. 
Fixed-income mandates can be broadly classified into liability-based mandates and 
total return mandates. Exhibit 5  provides a broad overview of the different types of 
mandates, splitting the universe into two broad categories—liability-based mandates 
and total return mandates.
Exhibit 5: Fixed-Income Mandates
Fixed-income mandates
Liability  based Total return
Pure indexing
Enhanced indexin g
Active managemen tCash flow matching
Duration matchin g
Deriv atives overlay
Contingent immuniz ation
Liability-Based Mandates
Liability-based mandates  are investments that take an investor’s future obligations 
into consideration. Liability-based mandates are managed to match or cover expected 
liability payments (future cash outflows) with future projected cash inflows. As such, 
they are also referred to as asset/liability management (ALM) or mandates that use 
liability-driven investments (LDIs). These types of mandates are structured in a way 
to ensure that a liability or a stream of liabilities (e.g., a company’s pension liabilities 
or those projected by insurance companies) can be covered and that any risk of short -
falls or deficient cash inflows is minimized. Cash flow matching  is an immunization 
approach that attempts to ensure that all future liability payouts are matched precisely 
by cash flows from bonds or fixed-income derivatives. Duration matching  is an 
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 52
immunization approach that is based on the duration of assets and liabilities. Ideally, 
the liabilities being matched (the liability portfolio) and the portfolio of assets (the 
bond portfolio) should be affected similarly by a change in interest rates. The man -
dates may use futures contracts (such as in a derivatives overlay) and, as in the case of 
contingent immunization —a hybrid approach that combines immunization with an 
active management approach when assets exceed the present value of liabilities—may 
allow for active bond portfolio management. Such liability-based mandates, which 
will be covered in detail later, are important because of their extensive use by such 
entities as pension plans and insurance companies.
Total Return Mandates
Total return mandates are generally managed to either track or outperform a 
market-weighted fixed-income benchmark, such as the Bloomberg Barclays Global 
Aggregate Bond Index. They are used by many types of investors, including individuals, 
foundations, endowments, sovereign wealth funds, and defined contribution retirement 
plans. Liability-based and total return mandates exhibit common features, such as 
the goal to achieve the highest risk-adjusted returns (or perhaps the highest yields to 
maturity) given a set of constraints. The two types of mandates, however, have fun -
damentally different objectives. A common total return approach is pure indexing . It 
attempts to replicate a bond index as closely as possible and is sometimes referred to 
as “full replication. ” Under this approach, the targeted active return  (portfolio return 
minus benchmark return, also known as “tracking difference”) and active risk  (annu -
alized standard deviation of active returns, also known as the benchmark tracking 
risk or tracking error) are both zero. In practice, even if the active risk is zero, the 
realized portfolio return will almost always be lower than the corresponding index 
return because of trading costs and management fees. We will explain the limitations 
of this approach later, in our coverage of index-based strategies.
An enhanced indexing approach  maintains a close link to the benchmark but 
seeks to generate some outperformance relative to the benchmark. As with the 
pure indexing approach, in practice, enhanced indexing allows small deviations in 
portfolio holdings from the benchmark index but tracks the benchmark’s primary 
risk factor exposures very closely (particularly duration). Unlike the pure indexing 
approach, however, minor risk factor mismatches (e.g., sector or quality bets) are 
used in enhanced indexing.
Active management  allows larger risk factor mismatches relative to a benchmark 
index. These mismatches may cause significant return differences between the active 
portfolio and the underlying benchmark. Most notably, portfolio managers may take 
views on portfolio duration that differ markedly from the duration of the underlying 
benchmark. To take advantage of potential opportunities in changing market environ -
ments, active managers may incur significant portfolio turnover—often considerably 
higher than the underlying benchmark’s turnover. Active portfolio managers normally 
charge higher management fees than pure or enhanced indexing managers charge.
Exhibit 6  summarizes the key features of the total return approaches.
Roles of Fixed-Income Securities in Portfolios 53
Exhibit 6: Total Return Approaches: Key Features
Pure Indexing Enhanced Indexing Active Management
Objective Match benchmark 
return and risk as 
closely as possibleModest outperfor -
mance (generally 
20–30 bps) of 
benchmark while 
active risk is kept 
low (typically around 
50 bps or lower)Higher outperfor -
mance (generally 
around 50 bps or 
more) of benchmark 
and higher active 
risk levels
Portfolio weights Ideally the same as 
benchmark or only 
slight mismatchesSmall deviations 
from underlying 
benchmarkSignificant devia -
tions from underly -
ing benchmark
Target risk factor 
profileAims to match risk 
factors exactlyMost primary risk 
factors are closely 
matched (in particu -
lar, duration)Large risk factor 
deviations from 
benchmark (in 
particular, duration; 
note that some 
active strategies do 
not take large risk 
factor deviations 
and focus on high 
idiosyncratic risk)
Turnover Similar to underlying 
benchmarkSlightly higher 
than underlying 
benchmarkConsiderably higher 
than underlying 
benchmark
Fixed-Income Mandates with ESG Considerations
Some fixed-income mandates include a requirement that environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG) factors be considered during the investment process. When consid -
ering these factors, an analyst or portfolio manager may look for evidence of whether 
the portfolio contains companies whose operations are favorable or unfavorable in 
the context of ESG and whether such companies’ actions and resource management 
practices reflect a sustainable business model. For example, the analyst or portfolio 
manager may consider whether a company’s activities involved significant environ -
mental damage, instances of unfair labor practices, or lapses in corporate governance 
integrity. For companies that do not fare favorably in an ESG analysis, investors may 
assume that these companies are more likely to encounter future ESG-related incidents 
that could cause serious reputational and financial damage to the company. Such inci -
dents could impair a company’s credit quality and result in a decline in both the price 
of the company’s bonds and the performance of a portfolio containing those bonds.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF DIFFERENT TOTAL RETURN 
APPROACHES
1. A consultant for a large corporate pension plan is looking at three funds 
(Funds X, Y, and Z) as part of the pension plan’s global fixed-income allo -
cation. All three funds use the Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Bond 
Index as a benchmark. Exhibit 7  provides the characteristics of each fund 
and the index. Identify the approach (pure indexing, enhanced indexing, or 
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 54
active management) that is most likely  used by each fund and support your 
choices by referencing the information in Exhibit 7 .
Exhibit 7: Characteristics of Funds X, Y , and Z and the Bloomberg Barclays 
Global Aggregate Bond Index
 
Risk and Return Characteristics Fund X Fund Y Fund ZBloomberg 
Barclays 
Global Aggre -
gate Bond 
Index
Average maturity (years) 8.61 8.35 9.45 8.34
Modified duration (years) 6.37 6.35 7.37 6.34
Average yield to maturity (%) 1.49 1.42 1.55 1.43
Convexity 0.65 0.60 0.72 0.60
Quality
AAA 41.10 41.20 40.11 41.24
AA 15.32 15.13 14.15 15.05
A 28.01 28.51 29.32 28.78
BBB 14.53 14.51 15.23 14.55
BB 0.59 0.55 1.02 0.35
Not rated 0.45 0.10 0.17 0.05
Maturity Exposure
0–3 years 21.43 21.67 19.20 21.80
3–5 years 23.01 24.17 22.21 24.23
5–10 years 32.23 31.55 35.21 31.67
10+ years 23.33 22.61 23.38 22.30
Country Exposure
United States 42.55 39.44 35.11 39.56
Japan 11.43 18.33 13.33 18.36
France 7.10 6.11 6.01 6.08
United Kingdom 3.44 5.87 4.33 5.99
Germany 6.70 5.23 4.50 5.30
Italy 4.80 4.01 4.43 4.07
Canada 4.44 3.12 5.32 3.15
Other 19.54 17.89 26.97 17.49
 
Notes:  Quality, maturity exposure, and country exposure are shown as a percentage of the total 
for each fund and the index. Weights do not always sum to 100 because of rounding. Historical 
data used as of February 2016.
Source:  Barclays Research.
Solution
Fund X most likely uses an enhanced indexing approach. Fund X’s modified 
duration and convexity are very close to those of the benchmark but still 
differ slightly. The average maturity of Fund X is slightly longer than that of 
the benchmark, whereas Fund X’s average yield to maturity is slightly higher 
than that of the benchmark. Fund X also has deviations in quality, maturity 
exposure, and country exposure from the benchmark, providing further 
Fixed-Income Portfolio Measures 55
evidence of an enhanced indexing approach. Some of these deviations are 
meaningful; for example, Fund X has a relatively strong underweighting in 
Japan.
Fund Y most likely uses a pure indexing approach because it provides the 
closest match to the Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Bond Index. 
The risk and return characteristics are almost identical for Fund Y and the 
benchmark. Furthermore, quality, maturity exposure, and country exposure 
deviations from the benchmark are very minor.
Fund Z most likely uses an active management approach because risk and 
return characteristics, quality, maturity exposure, and country exposure 
differ markedly from the index. The difference can be seen most notably 
with the mismatch in modified duration (7.37 for Fund Z versus 6.34 for 
the benchmark). Other differences between Fund Z and the index exist, but 
a sizable duration mismatch provides the strongest evidence of an active 
management approach.
FIXED-INCOME PORTFOLIO MEASURES
describe fixed-income portfolio measures of risk and return as well 
as correlation characteristics
We first provide a brief review of fixed-income risk and return measures introduced 
in earlier lessons ( Exhibit 8 ).
Exhibit 8: Bond Risk and Return Measures
Macaulay duration 
(MacDur)Macaulay duration is a weighted average of the time 
to receipt of the bond’s promised payments, where the 
weights are the shares of the full price that correspond to 
each of the bond’s promised future payments.
Modified duration 
(ModDur)The Macaulay duration statistic is divided by one plus the 
yield per period, which estimates the percentage price 
change (including accrued interest) for a bond given a 
change in its yield to maturity.
Effective duration (EffDur) The sensitivity of the bond’s price to a change in a bench -
mark yield curve (i.e., using a parallel shift in the bench -
mark yield curve (ΔCurve). Effective duration is essential 
to the measurement of the interest rate risk of a complex 
bond where future cash flows are uncertain.
Key rate duration  
(KeyRatDur, also called par-
tial duration )A measure of a bond’s sensitivity to a change in the 
benchmark yield curve at a specific maturity point or 
segment. Key rate durations help identify “shaping risk” 
for a bond or a portfolio—that is, its sensitivity to changes 
in the shape of the benchmark yield curve (e.g., the yield 
curve becoming steeper or flatter or showing more or less 
curvature).3
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 56
Empirical duration A measure of interest rate sensitivity that is determined 
from market data—that is, run a regression of bond price 
returns on changes in a benchmark interest rate (for 
example, the price returns of a 10-year euro-denominated 
corporate bond could be regressed on changes in the 
10-year German bund or the 10-year Euribor swap rate).
Money duration A measure of the price change in units of the currency in 
which the bond is denominated. Money duration can be 
stated per 100 of par value or in terms of the bond’s actual 
position size in the portfolio. Commonly called “dollar 
duration” in the United States.
Price value of a basis point 
(PVBP)An estimate of the change in a bond’s price given a 1 bp 
change in yield to maturity. PVBP “scales” money dura -
tion so that it can be interpreted as money gained or lost 
for each basis point change in the reference interest rate.
Also referred to in North America as the “dollar value of 
an 0.01” (pronounced oh-one ) and abbreviated as DV01. 
It is calibrated to a bond’s par value of 100; for example, 
a DV01 of $0.08 is equivalent to 8 cents per 100 points. 
(The terms PVBP and DV01 are used interchangeably; 
we will generally use PVBP , but DV01 has the same 
meaning).
A related statistic to PVBP , sometimes called “basis point 
value” (or BPV), is the money duration times 0.0001 (1 
bp).
Convexity A second-order effect that describes a bond’s price behav -
ior for larger yield movements. It captures the extent to 
which the yield/price relationship deviates from a linear 
relationship.
If a bond has positive convexity, the expected return 
of the bond will be higher than the return of an 
identical-duration, lower-convexity bond if interest rates 
change.
This price behavior is valuable to investors, and therefore, 
a bond with higher convexity might be expected to have a 
lower yield to maturity than a similar-duration bond with 
less convexity.
Nominal convexity calculations assume that the cash 
flows do not change when yields to maturity change.
Effective convexity (EffCon) A curve convexity statistic that measures the secondary 
effect of a change in a benchmark yield curve. A pric -
ing model is used to determine the new prices when the 
benchmark curve is shifted upward (PV+) and downward 
(PV−) by the same amount (ΔCurve), holding other factors 
constant.
Exhibit 8  provides a reminder of convexity and why it is valuable. It is likely to be even 
more valuable when interest rate volatility is expected to increase. This dynamic tends 
to drive changes in the shape of the yield curve: As convexity becomes more valuable, 
investors will bid up prices on the longer-maturity bonds (which have more convexity), 
Fixed-Income Portfolio Measures 57
and the long end of the curve may decline or even invert (or invert further), increasing 
the curvature of the yield curve. A helpful heuristic for understanding convexity is 
that for zero-coupon (option free) bonds, the following are true:
 ■Macaulay durations increase linearly with maturity: A 30-year zero-cou -
pon bond has three times the duration of a 10-year zero-coupon bond. 
Convexity is approximately proportional to duration squared; therefore, a 
30-year zero-coupon bond has about nine times the convexity of a 10-year 
zero-coupon bond.
 ■Coupon-paying bonds have more convexity than zero-coupon bonds of the 
same duration: A 30-year coupon-paying bond with a duration of approxi -
mately 18 years has more convexity than an 18-year zero-coupon bond. The 
more widely dispersed a bond’s cash flows are around the duration point, 
the more convexity it will exhibit. For this reason, a zero-coupon bond has 
the lowest convexity of all bonds of a given duration.
SCALING CONVENTIONS
Convexity statistics must always be interpreted carefully because there is no 
convention for how they should be presented. When calculating the impact 
of convexity in approximating returns, the proper accounting for the scaling 
of convexity is important. Note that some data vendors report the convexity 
statistic divided by 100, whereas other applications may use the “raw” number.
Portfolio Measures of Risk and Return
Building on the measures of risk and return that apply to individual fixed-income 
securities, we now provide an overview of measures of risk and return applicable to 
portfolios of fixed-income securities. We will then illustrate their use in fixed income 
in a portfolio management scenario and refer to them in the subsequent coverage of 
liability-driven investing and total return strategies.
Bond portfolio duration  is the sensitivity of a portfolio of bonds to small changes 
in interest rates. Recall that it can be calculated as the weighted average of time to 
receipt of the aggregate cash flows or, more commonly, as the weighted average of 
the individual bond durations of the portfolio.
Modified duration of a bond portfolio  indicates the percentage change in the mar -
ket value given a change in yield to maturity. If the modified duration of a portfolio 
is 15, then for a 100 bp increase or decrease in yield to maturity, the market value of 
the portfolio is expected to decrease or increase by about 15%. Modified duration of 
a portfolio comprising j fixed-income securities can be estimated as
  AvgModDur  =  ∑ 
j=1  J
   ModDur   j   (  M  V  j   _ MV  )  , 
where MV stands for market value of the portfolio and MVj is the market value of a 
specific bond.
Convexity of a bond portfolio  can be a valuable tool when positioning a portfolio. 
Importantly, it is a second-order effect; it operates behind duration in importance and 
can largely be ignored for small yield changes. When convexity is added with the use 
of derivatives, however, it can be extremely important to returns. This effect will be 
demonstrated later. Negative convexity may also be an important factor in a bond’s 
or a portfolio’s returns. For bonds with short option positions embedded in their 
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 58
structures (such as mortgage-backed securities or callable bonds) or portfolios with 
short option positions, the convexity effect may be large. For a portfolio comprising 
j fixed-income securities, it can be estimated as
  AvgConvexity  =  ∑ 
j=1  J
   Convexity   j   (  M  V  j   _ MV  )  . 
Adding convexity to a portfolio is not costless. Portfolios with higher convexity are 
most often characterized by lower yields to maturity. Investors will be willing to pay 
for increased convexity when they expect yields to change by more than enough to 
cover the amount given up in yield to maturity. Convexity is more valuable when yields 
to maturity are more volatile. A portfolio’s convexity can be altered by shifting the 
maturity/duration distribution of bonds in the portfolio, by adding individual bonds 
with the desired convexity properties, or by using derivatives.
Effective duration and convexity of a portfolio  are the relevant summary statistics 
when future cash flows of bonds in a portfolio are contingent on interest rate changes.
  Effective Duration  (EffDur )  =    ( PV  −  )  −  ( PV  +  )   ____________   2 (ΔCurve )  ( PV  0  )   . 
  Effective Convexity  (EffCon )  =    ( PV  −  )  +  ( PV  +  )  − 2 ( PV  0  )   __________________     (ΔCurve )    2  ( PV  0  )   . 
Spread duration  is a useful measure for determining a portfolio’s sensitivity to changes 
in credit spreads. Duration indicates the percentage price effect of an interest rate 
change on a bond, and spread duration measures the effect of a change in yield spread 
on a bond’s price. Spread duration provides the approximate percentage increase 
(decrease) in bond price expected for a 1% decrease (increase) in credit spread.
Duration times spread  (DTS) is a modification of the spread duration defini -
tion to incorporate the empirical observation that spread changes across the credit 
spectrum tend to occur on a proportional percentage  basis rather than being based 
on absolute  basis point changes. This measure, reviewed in detail in a later lesson, 
weights the spread duration by a factor equal to the current credit spread, increasing 
the magnitude of expected price changes for a given change in spread.
Portfolio dispersion  captures the variance of the times to receipt of cash flows 
with respect to the duration. It is used in measuring interest rate immunization for 
liabilities. Whereas Macaulay duration is the weighted average  of the times to receipt 
of cash flows, dispersion is the weighted variance . It measures the extent to which the 
payments are spread out around the duration. Convexity is affected by the dispersion 
of cash flows. Higher cash flow dispersion leads to an increase in convexity.
Correlations between Fixed-Income Sectors
Correlation characteristics refer to the interplay between benchmark rates, spreads, 
and such factors as currencies. Correlations between fixed-income sectors within a 
market are likely to be higher than those across markets given country-specific factors, 
such as central bank policy, economic growth, and inflation. In developed economies, 
investment-grade securities with a low probability of default are highly correlated with 
interest rate changes in the sovereign yield curve. Below-investment-grade securities 
are affected more by changes in spread than by changes in general interest rates and 
often exhibit stronger correlations with equity markets. Recall that correlations between 
interest rates and spreads can often be negative. As the economy worsens, interest 
rates fall and spreads widen, and the reverse occurs when the economy improves. 
Correlations for global government bonds will be partly driven by changes in interest 
rates but also by changes in local currency exchange rates.
Fixed-Income Portfolio Measures 59
Use of Measures of Risk and Return in Portfolio Management
We now provide an overview of how portfolio measures may be used by fund man -
agers to reflect their views.
Portfolio Duration in Total Return Mandates
Total return mandates that are actively managed often use a top-down approach to 
establish the large risk factors in a portfolio combined with a bottom-up approach of 
individual security selection. The analytics discussed earlier can be used to measure 
and manage the macroeconomic risk factors in the portfolio. Portfolio managers 
develop or use a forecast of the direction of the economy and an assessment of the 
current business, political, and regulatory environment to develop themes that can be 
reflected in the portfolio. On the basis of expectations for changes in interest rates and 
the shape of the yield curve, portfolio managers can adjust the duration of a portfolio 
to reflect their view. For example, if the portfolio manager expects interest rates to 
rise and the yield curve to steepen, she would reduce the exposure of the portfolio to 
longer-dated bonds relative to the benchmark, which would reduce portfolio duration. 
If her view materialized as expected, all else equal, the fund would outperform the 
benchmark, resulting in active excess returns.
Managing Credit Exposure Using Spread Duration
Portfolio managers often use the spread duration measures introduced earlier to 
gauge the portfolio’s sensitivity to changes in credit spreads. A portfolio manager 
expecting credit spreads to narrow may wish to increase the spread duration in an 
actively managed portfolio. The manager may face constraints, such as a target dura -
tion, rating-based restrictions, or limits to derivatives use, as part of the investment 
mandate. A second way to increase the portfolio credit exposure is to reduce the 
average credit rating of the portfolio; for example, reduce A rated names and increase 
BBB rated credits. In this case, the duration times spread measure may be a more 
appropriate measure of portfolio value changes. These active portfolio management 
tools are addressed in more detail in a later lesson on credit strategies.
The single bond risk and return measures discussed previously at an aggregate 
level will determine the large risk factors for the portfolio. The portfolio manager will 
select securities as part of the portfolio construction process to achieve a targeted level 
of tracking error or active risk relative to a benchmark. The contribution to duration, 
convexity, spread duration, and DTS of a single bond to the portfolio is weighted by 
the market value of the position relative to the total market value of the portfolio. 
The portfolio manager will select a diversified universe of holdings to construct the 
portfolio in the manner he believes will optimize expected return and risk.
Relative Value Concept
Relative value  is a key concept in the active management of fixed-income portfolios 
that describes the selection of the most attractive individual securities to populate 
the portfolio with, using ranking and comparing. Portfolio managers analyze and 
rank securities based on such considerations as valuation, issuer fundamentals, and 
market technical conditions (supply and demand). This analysis is carried out across 
sectors, issuers, and individual securities to select securities with the most attractive 
risk and return profiles. The portfolio manager will establish a time horizon over 
which the relative value analysis is applied. The single bond characteristics can be 
used to express an active position relative to the benchmark. For example, each bond 
has a distinct key rate duration (KeyRateDur) profile. If the portfolio manager wants 
to establish a bullet or barbell position as part of the active risk decision, bonds with 
a specific KeyRateDur profile will be selected. Similarly, the portfolio manager can 
select securities that in aggregate have more/less DTS than the benchmark if she is 
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 60
bullish/bearish on corporate bond spreads. The selection of the most attractive indi -
vidual securities to populate the portfolio will apply relative value analysis to compare 
and rank securities. In the context of the efficient frontier, those securities that offer 
the most expected return for a given level of risk would offer the best relative value.
The positioning of the portfolio reflects the portfolio manager’s total return expec -
tations for the market and relative returns versus the benchmark, given his views 
about both the direction of interest rates and credit spread changes. Diversification 
considerations ensure that idiosyncratic risks are within acceptable risk parameters.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
1. Which of the following best describes a measure of sensitivity to 
changes in yields to maturity for a portfolio of bonds with cash flows contin -
gent on interest rate changes?
A. Portfolio dispersion
B. Modified duration
C. Effective duration
Solution
C is correct. Effective duration is particularly relevant in scenarios where the 
cash flows from the bonds held in a portfolio are contingent on changes in 
interest rates.
2. Which of the following is a true statement about portfolio dispersion?
A. It can be described as the variance of time to the receipt of cash flows.
B. The higher the dispersion, the lower the convexity of the portfolio.
C. It determines the portfolio’s sensitivity to changes in credit spreads.
Solution
A is correct. Dispersion measures the variance of the time to receive cash 
flows from the fixed-income securities held.
BOND MARKET LIQUIDITY
describe bond market liquidity, including the differences among 
market sub-sectors, and discuss the effect of liquidity on 
fixed-income portfolio management
A liquid security is one that may be transacted quickly with little effect on the security’s 
price. Fixed-income securities vary greatly in their liquidity.
Compared with equities, fixed-income markets are generally less liquid. The global 
fixed-income universe contains many individual bonds with varying features. Many 
issuers have multiple bonds outstanding with their own unique maturity dates, coupon 
rates, early redemption features, and other specific features.
An important structural feature affecting liquidity is that fixed-income markets are 
typically over-the-counter dealer markets. Search costs (the costs of finding a willing 
counterparty) exist in bond markets because investors may have to locate desired 
bonds. In addition, when either buying or selling, investors may have to obtain quotes 4
Bond Market Liquidity 61
from various dealers to obtain the most advantageous pricing. With limited, although 
improving, sources for transaction prices and quotes, bond markets are ordinarily 
less transparent than equity markets. Liquidity, search costs, and price transparency 
are closely related to the type of issuer and its credit quality. An investor is likely to 
find that bonds of a highly creditworthy government issuer are more liquid, have 
greater price transparency, and have lower search costs than bonds of, for example, 
a corporate issuer with lower credit quality.
Bond liquidity is typically highest immediately after issuance. For example, an 
on-the-run bond issue (the most recently issued bonds) of a highly creditworthy 
sovereign entity is typically more liquid than a bond with similar features—including 
maturity—that was issued previously (an off-the-run bond). On-the-run bonds also 
trade at narrow bid–ask spreads. This difference in liquidity is typically present even 
if the off-the-run bond was issued only one or two months earlier. One reason for this 
phenomenon is that soon after bonds are issued, dealers normally have a supply of the 
bonds in inventory, but as time goes by and bonds are traded, many are purchased 
by buy-and-hold investors. Once in the possession of such investors, those bonds are 
no longer available for trading.
Recall that liquidity typically affects bond yields to maturity. Bond investors 
require higher yields for investing in illiquid securities relative to otherwise identical 
securities that are more liquid. The higher yield to maturity compensates investors 
for the costs they may encounter if they try to sell illiquid bonds prior to maturity. 
These costs include the opportunity costs associated with the delays in finding trading 
counterparties as well as the bid–ask spread (which is a direct loss of wealth). The 
incremental yield to maturity investors require for holding illiquid bonds instead of 
liquid bonds is referred to as a liquidity premium . The magnitude of the liquidity pre -
mium normally varies depending on such factors as the issuer, the issue size, and time 
to maturity. For example, when a 10-year US Treasury bond shifts from on-the-run to 
off-the-run status, it typically trades at a yield to maturity several basis points above 
that of the new on-the-run bond.
Liquidity among Bond Market Sub-Sectors
Bond market liquidity varies across sub-sectors. These sub-sectors can be categorized 
by such key features as issuer type, credit quality, issue size, and maturity. The global 
bond market includes sovereign government bonds, non-sovereign government 
bonds, government-related bonds, corporate bonds, and securitized bonds (such 
as asset-backed securities and commercial mortgage-backed securities). Sovereign 
government bonds are typically more liquid than corporate and non-sovereign gov -
ernment bonds. Their superior liquidity relates to their large issuance size, use as 
benchmark bonds, acceptance as collateral in the repo market, and well-recognized 
issuers. Sovereign government bonds of countries with high credit quality and large 
issuance are typically more liquid than bonds of lower-credit-quality countries.
Corporate bonds are issued by many different companies and represent a wide 
spectrum of credit quality. For corporate bonds with low credit quality, it can be dif -
ficult to find a counterparty dealer with the securities in inventory or willing to take 
them into inventory. Bonds of infrequent issuers are often less liquid than the bonds 
of issuers with many outstanding issues because market participants are less familiar 
with companies that seldom issue debt. In addition, smaller issues are generally less 
liquid than larger issues because small bond issues are typically excluded from major 
bond indexes with minimum issue size requirements.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 62
The Effects of Liquidity on Fixed-Income Portfolio Management
Liquidity concerns influence fixed-income portfolio management in multiple ways, 
including pricing, portfolio construction, and consideration of alternatives to bonds 
(such as derivatives).
Pricing
Sources for pricing of recent bond transactions—notably corporate bonds—are not 
always readily available. Note that price transparency is improving in some bond 
markets. In the United States, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority’s Trade 
Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) and the Municipal Securities Rulemaking 
Board’s Electronic Municipal Market Access (EMMA) are electronic systems that help 
increase transparency in corporate and municipal bond markets, and similar initiatives 
play a similar role elsewhere for corporate bonds traded on market exchanges, increas -
ing pricing transparency. In most bond markets, however, the lack of transparency in 
corporate bond trading presents a challenge.
Because many bonds do not trade or trade infrequently, using recent transaction 
prices to represent current value is not practical. Reliance on last traded prices, which 
may be out of date and may not incorporate current market conditions, could result 
in costly trading decisions. The determinants of corporate bond value, including 
interest rates, credit spreads, and liquidity premiums, change frequently. One solution 
to the pricing problem is to use matrix pricing that makes use of observable liquid 
benchmark yields of similar maturity and duration as well as benchmark spreads of 
bonds with comparable times to maturity, credit quality, and sector or security type 
to estimate the current market yield and price.
Portfolio Construction
Investors’ liquidity preferences directly influence portfolio construction. In constructing 
a portfolio, investors must consider the important trade-off between yield to maturity 
and liquidity. As mentioned previously, illiquid bonds typically have higher yields 
to maturity; a buy-and-hold investor seeking higher returns will often prefer less 
liquid bonds with higher yields to maturity. In contrast, investors who prefer greater 
liquidity will likely sacrifice returns and choose more liquid bonds with lower yields 
to maturity. Some investors may restrict their portfolio holdings to bonds within a 
certain maturity range. This restriction reduces the need to sell bonds to generate 
needed cash inflows. In such cases, the investors that anticipate their liquidity needs 
may give up the higher yield to maturity typically available to longer-term bonds. In 
addition to avoiding longer-term bonds, investors with liquidity concerns may also 
avoid small issues and private placements of corporate bonds.
A challenge in bond portfolio construction relates to the dealer market. Bond 
dealers often carry an inventory of bonds because buy and sell orders do not arrive 
simultaneously. A dealer is not certain how long bonds will remain in its inventory. 
Less liquid bonds are likely to remain in inventory longer than liquid bonds. A dealer 
provides bid–ask quotes (prices at which it will buy and sell) on bonds of its choice. 
Some illiquid bonds will not have quotes, particularly bid quotes, from any dealer. 
Several different factors determine the bid–ask spread. Riskier bonds often have higher 
bid–ask spreads because of dealers’ aversion to hold those bonds in inventory. Because 
bond dealers must finance their inventories, the dealers incur costs in both obtaining 
funding and holding those bonds. Dealers seek to cover their costs and make a profit 
through the bid–ask spread, and therefore, the spread will be higher for illiquid bonds 
that are likely to remain in inventory longer.
A bond’s bid–ask spread is also a function of the bond’s complexity and how eas -
ily market participants can analyze the issuer’s creditworthiness. Bid–ask spreads in 
government bonds are generally lower than spreads in corporate bonds or structured 
Bond Market Liquidity 63
financial instruments, such as asset-backed securities. Conventional (plain vanilla) 
corporate bonds normally have lower spreads than corporate bonds with non-standard 
or complex features, such as embedded options. Bonds of large, high-credit-quality 
corporations that have many outstanding bond issues are the most liquid among 
corporate bonds, and thus they have relatively low bid–ask spreads compared with 
smaller, less creditworthy companies.
Illiquidity directly increases bid–ask spreads of bonds, which increases the cost 
of trading. Higher transaction costs reduce the benefits of active portfolio decisions 
and may decrease portfolio managers’ willingness to adjust their portfolios to take 
advantage of opportunities that present themselves. As an example to quantify trading 
costs, if a corporate bond with a 15-year duration is being quoted by dealers with a 
10 bp bid–ask spread, the cost impact to the portfolio is approximately 1.50% (0.0010 
× 15 × 100 = 1.50%). The portfolio manager would buy the bond at $100, and when 
the portfolio is priced (typically at bid or the midpoint between the bid and the ask), 
the bond would have a value of $98.50, reducing the total portfolio return. This is the 
price that would be realized if the bond were sold, holding other factors constant. To 
mitigate trading costs, investors can participate in the primary or new issue market 
where bonds are typically issued at a discount to the price at which a similar issue 
trades in the secondary market.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK  
1. Rank the following instruments from the usually most liquid to the 
least liquid:
 ■Low-credit-quality corporate bond
 ■Recently issued on-the-run sovereign bond issued by a high-cred -
it-quality government
 ■High-credit-quality corporate bond
 ■Sovereign bond issued a year ago by a high-credit-quality government
Solution
 ■Recently issued on-the-run sovereign bond issued by a high-cred -
it-quality government
 ■Sovereign bond issued a year ago by a high-credit-quality government
 ■High-credit-quality corporate bond
 ■Low-credit-quality corporate bond
Alternatives to Direct Investment in Bonds
Because transacting in fixed-income securities may present challenges resulting from 
low liquidity in many segments of the fixed-income market, fund managers may use 
alternative methods to establish bond market exposures. The methods we outline 
are applicable across different fixed-income mandates. We will take a more in-depth 
look at the ones particularly relevant to passive and liability-driven mandates later 
as part of our coverage dedicated to such mandates. Next, we provide an overview 
of the most common methods—specifically, mutual funds, exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs), exchange-traded derivatives, and OTC derivatives. In considering direct ver -
sus indirect investments, the asset manager must weigh the ongoing fees associated 
with such instruments as mutual funds and ETFs against the bid–offer cost of direct 
investment in the underlying securities.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 64
ETFs and mutual funds.  These products provide an alternative to transacting in 
individual bonds. Mutual funds are pooled investment vehicles whose shares or units 
represent a proportional share in the ownership of the assets in an underlying portfolio. 
In the case of open-end mutual funds, new shares may be redeemed or issued at the 
fund’s net asset value (NAV) established at the end of each trading day based on the 
fund’s valuation of all existing assets minus liabilities, divided by the total number of 
shares outstanding. Bond mutual fund investors enjoy the advantage of being able to 
redeem holdings at the fund’s NAV rather than needing to sell illiquid positions. The 
benefit from economies of scale is usually the overriding factor for smaller investors 
in their choice of a bond mutual fund over direct investment. Because bonds often 
trade at a minimum lot size of USD1 million or higher per bond, successful repli -
cation of a broad index or construction of a diversified actively managed portfolio 
could easily require hundreds of millions of dollars in investments. Therefore, the 
greater diversification across fixed-income markets achievable by a larger fund may 
be well worth the additional cost in terms of an upfront load in some instances and 
an annual management fee.
Although investors benefit from increased diversification, the fund must outline its 
stated investment objectives and periodic fees, but actual security holdings are available 
only on a retroactive basis. Unlike the underlying securities, bond mutual funds have 
no maturity date; the fund manager continuously purchases and sells bonds to track 
index performance, and monthly interest payments fluctuate based on fund holdings.
Exchange-traded funds share some mutual fund characteristics but have more 
tradability features. Investors benefit from greater bond ETF liquidity versus mutual 
funds given their availability to be purchased or sold throughout the trading day.
Exchange-traded derivatives.  Futures and options on futures provide exposure to 
underlying bonds. Being exchange-traded, they involve financial instruments with 
standardized terms, documentation, and pricing traded on an organized exchange. 
Exchange-traded products also include interest rate products and options for interest 
rate–related ETFs.
OTC derivatives.  Interest rate swaps are the most widely used OTC derivative 
worldwide and entail customized arrangements between two counterparties that ref -
erence an underlying market price or index. Some interest rate swaps are liquid, with 
multiple swap dealers posting competitive two-way quotes. In addition to interest rate 
swaps, fixed-income portfolio managers use inflation swaps, total return swaps, and 
credit swaps to alter their portfolio exposure. Because they trade over the counter, 
swaps may be tailored to an investor’s specific needs.
A total return swap (TRS), a common over-the-counter portfolio derivative strat -
egy, combines elements of interest rate swaps and credit derivatives. Similar to an 
interest rate swap, a total return swap involves the periodic exchange of cash flows 
between two parties for the life of the contract. Unlike an interest rate swap, in which 
counterparties exchange a stream of fixed cash flows versus a floating-rate benchmark 
such as the MRR (the market reference rate) to transform fixed assets or liabilities to 
a variable exposure, a TRS has a periodic exchange based on a reference obligation 
that is an underlying equity, commodity, or bond index. Exhibit 9  outlines the most 
basic TRS structure. The total return receiver  receives both the cash flows from the 
underlying index and any appreciation in the index over the period in exchange for 
paying the MRR plus a predetermined spread. The total return payer  is responsible 
for paying the reference obligation cash flows and return to the receiver but will also 
be compensated by the receiver for any depreciation in the index or default losses 
incurred by the portfolio.
A Model for Fixed-Income Returns 65
Exhibit 9: Total Return Swap Mechanics
Index Cash Flows + Appreciation
MRR + SpreadTotal Return
Receiver Total Return
Payer 
Underlying Bond
IndexIndex ReturnsIndex Depreciation + Default Losses
The TRS transaction is an over-the-counter derivative contract based on an ISDA 
(International Swaps and Derivatives Association) master agreement. This contract 
specifies a notional amount, periodic cash flows, and final maturity, as well as the credit 
and other legal provisions related to the transaction. The historical attractiveness of 
using TRS stemmed from the efficient risk transfer on the reference obligation from 
one counterparty to another on a confidential basis without requiring the full cash 
outlay associated with the mutual fund or ETF purchase. In fact, another way to think 
of the TRS is as a synthetic secured financing transaction in which the investor (the 
total return receiver) benefits from more-advantageous funding terms faced by a dealer 
(typically the total return payer) offering to facilitate the transaction.
The potential for both a smaller initial cash outlay and lower swap bid–offer costs 
compared with the transaction costs of direct purchase or use of a mutual fund or 
ETF are the most compelling reasons to consider a TRS to add fixed-income exposure.
That said, several considerations may offset these benefits in a few instances:
 ■The investor does not legally own the underlying assets but, rather, has a 
combined synthetic long position in the market and the credit risk of the 
index that is contingent on the performance of the total return payer. The 
total return receiver must both perform the necessary credit due diligence 
on its counterparty and face the rollover risk at maturity of having the abil -
ity to renew the contract with reasonable pricing and business terms in the 
future.
 ■Structural changes to the market and greater regulatory oversight, partic -
ularly capital rules affecting dealers, have raised the cost and increased the 
operational burden of these transactions because of the need to collateralize 
mark-to-market positions frequently and within a shorter timeframe.
 ■As a funding cost arbitrage transaction, the TRS can allow investors to 
gain access to subsets of the fixed-income markets, such as bank loans or 
high-yield instruments for which cash markets are relatively illiquid or 
the cost and administrative complexity of maintaining a portfolio of these 
instruments are prohibitive for the investor. 
A MODEL FOR FIXED-INCOME RETURNS
describe and interpret a model for fixed-income returns5
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 66
Investors often have views on future changes in the yield curve and structure or 
restructure their portfolios accordingly. Investment strategies should be evaluated 
in terms of expected returns rather than just yields to maturity. A bond’s yield to 
maturity provides an incomplete measure of its expected return. Instead, expected 
fixed-income returns consist of several different components in addition to yield to 
maturity. Examining these components leads to a better understanding of the driving 
forces behind expected returns—on individual bonds and fixed-income portfolios. 
The focus is on expected  as opposed to realized  returns, which may be decomposed 
in a similar manner.
Decomposing Expected Returns
Decomposing expected fixed-income returns allows an investor to differentiate among 
several important return components. At the most general level, expected returns, 
denoted as E(R), can be decomposed (approximately) in the following manner:
 E(R) ≈ Coupon income
 +/– Rolldown  return
 +/– E(ΔPrice due to investor’s  view of benchmark  yield)
 +/– E(ΔPrice due to investor’s  view of yield spreads)
 +/– E(ΔPrice due to investor’s  view of currency value changes),
where E(. . .) represents effects on expected returns based on expectations of the item 
in parentheses and Δ represents “change. ” The decomposition holds only approximately 
and ignores taxes (note that some of the material on decomposing expected returns 
has been adapted from Hanke and Seals (2010 ).
Coupon Income
Coupon income is the income that an investor receives from coupon payments rel -
ative to the bond’s price and interest on reinvestment income. Assuming there is no 
reinvestment income, coupon income equals a bond’s annual current yield.
 Coupon income (or Current yield) = Annual coupon payment/Current  bond price.
Rolldown Return
The rolldown return, sometimes referred to as “rolldown and carry return, ” results 
from the bond “rolling down” the yield curve as the time to maturity decreases (see 
Exhibit 10 ), assuming zero interest rate volatility. Bond prices change as time passes 
even if the market discount rate remains the same. As time passes, a bond’s price 
typically moves closer to par. This price movement is illustrated by the constant-yield 
price trajectory, which shows the “pull to par” effect on the price of a bond trading 
at a premium or a discount to par value. If the issuer does not default, the price of a 
bond approaches par value as its time to maturity approaches zero.
A Model for Fixed-Income Returns 67
Exhibit 10: Rolling down the Yield Curve Effect
Yield (%)
TermTerm
Horizon P eriod Horizon P eriodCarry  Componen t Carry  Componen t
Horizon Y ield
and MaturityHorizon Y ield
and MaturityStarting Y ield
and MaturityStarting Y ield
and MaturityRoll-Down
Componen tRoll-Down
Componen t
The rolldown return equals the bond’s percentage price change assuming an unchanged 
yield curve over the strategy horizon. Bonds trading at a premium to their par value will 
experience capital losses during their remaining life, and bonds trading at a discount 
relative to their par value will experience capital gains during their remaining life.
To compute the rolldown return, the bond has to be revalued at the end of the 
strategy horizon assuming an unchanged yield curve. Then the rolldown return is as 
follows:
   Rolldown return
   =    ( Bond price   End-of-horizonperiod   −  Bond price   Beginning-of-horizonperiod  )      _______________________________________________      Bond price   Beginning-of-horizonperiod    .  
The sum of the coupon income and the rolldown return may be referred to as the 
bond’s rolling yield .
Views of Benchmark Yields
The expected change in price based on investor’s views of benchmark yields to maturity 
and the term structure of yield volatility reflects an investor’s expectation of changes in 
yields to maturity and yield volatility over the investment horizon. This expected change 
is zero if the investor expects yield curves and yield volatility to remain unchanged. 
Assuming the investor does expect a change in the yield curve, this expected return 
component is computed as follows: 
 E(Change in price based on investor’s  views of yields and yield volatility) 
 = (–ModDur  × ∆Yield) + [½ × Convexity  × (∆Yield)2 ],
 where ModDur is the modified duration of a bond, ∆Yield is the expected change in 
yield to maturity, and Convexity reflects the second-order effect of the price–yield 
relationship. Note that for bonds with embedded options, the duration and convexity 
measures used should be effective duration and effective convexity. Also, in contrast 
to fixed-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes have a modified duration that is largely 
due to spread changes, as described in detail later.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 68
Views of Yield Spreads
The expected change in price based on investor’s views of yield spreads reflects an 
investor’s expectation of changes in market credit spreads over the investment hori -
zon. When economic or credit conditions are improving, spreads are typically said to 
tighten, thereby reducing the required yield to maturity on the bond. Deteriorating 
conditions would conversely result in higher required yields to maturity. This com -
ponent of expected return reflects general market conditions rather than any spread 
changes due to issuer-specific (or idiosyncratic) risk and is computed as follows:
  E(ΔPrice based on investor’s  views of yield spreads) 
 = (–ModSpreadDur  × ∆Spread) + [½ × Convexity  × (∆Spread)2 ]. 
Yield spreads can also fluctuate because of idiosyncratic risk. Credit migration refers 
to credit quality changes that may result in an issuer downgrade or upgrade. This can 
result in either lower spreads for higher ratings or higher spreads for lower ratings 
affecting the expected return on bonds. Higher-quality credits tend to have low prob -
abilities of default but can experience changes in bond prices due to an anticipated or 
actual migration. The price impact is calculated in the same way as noted previously 
for market changes in yield to maturity. Note that investors face price declines on 
non-defaulted bonds if spreads widen. Yearly default rates can vary significantly and 
are more severe for speculative-grade (high-yield) issues.
Views of Currency Value Changes
If an investor holds bonds denominated in a currency other than her home currency, 
she also needs to factor in any expected fluctuations in the currency exchange rate 
or expected currency gains or losses over the investment horizon. The magnitude 
and direction of the change in the exchange rate can be based on a variety of factors, 
including the manager’s own view, results from surveys, or a quantitative model output. 
It can also be based on the exchange rate that can be locked in over the investment 
horizon using currency forwards.
Return measured in functional currency terms (domestic currency returns of foreign 
currency assets) can be shown as RDC = (1 + RFC)(1 + RFX) – 1 for a single asset or
 RDC =   ∑ i=1  n
     ω  i   (1 +  R  FC,i  )  (1 +  R  FX,i  )  − 1 
for a portfolio, where RDC and RFC are the domestic and foreign currency returns 
expressed as a percentage, RFX is the percentage change of the domestic currency versus 
the foreign currency, and ωi is the respective portfolio weight of each foreign currency 
asset (in domestic currency terms), with the sum of ωi equal to 1. In the context of 
the return decomposition framework, RDC simply combines the third factor, E(ΔPrice 
due to investor’s view of benchmark yield), and the fifth factor, (+/– E(ΔFunctional 
currency value), in the expected fixed-income return model.
DECOMPOSING EXPECTED RETURNS
1. Ann Smith works for a US investment firm in its London office. She 
manages the firm’s British pound–denominated corporate bond portfolio. 
Her department head in New York City has asked Smith to make a presen -
tation on next year’s total expected return of her portfolio in US dollars and 
the components of this return. Exhibit 11  shows information on the portfo -
lio and Smith’s expectations for the next year. Expected return (for the bond 
portfolio) and its components are on an annualized basis, and any potential 
A Model for Fixed-Income Returns 69
coupons are assumed to be paid annually. Calculate the total expected re -
turn of Smith’s bond portfolio, assuming no reinvestment income.
Exhibit 11: Portfolio Characteristics and Expectations
 
Notional principal of portfolio (in millions) £100
Average bond coupon payment (per £100 par value) £2.75
Coupon frequency Annual
Investment horizon 1 year
Current average bond price £97.12
Expected average bond price in one year (assuming an unchanged 
yield curve)£97.27
Average bond convexity in one year 18
Average bond modified duration in one year 3.70
Expected average benchmark yield-to-maturity change 0.26%
Expected change in spread (spread expected to narrow in this 
scenario)–0.10%
Expected currency losses (£ depreciation versus US$) 0.50%
 
Solution
The portfolio’s coupon income is 2.83%. The portfolio has an average cou -
pon of £2.75 on a £100 notional principal and currently trades at £97.12. The 
coupon income over a one-year horizon is 2.83% = £2.75/£97.12.
In one year’s time, assuming an unchanged yield curve and zero interest rate 
volatility, the rolldown return is 0.17% = (£97.27 – £97.12)/£97.12.
The rolling yield, which is the sum of the coupon income and the rolldown 
return, is 3.00% = 2.83% + 0.17%.
The expected change in price based on Smith’s views of benchmark yields to 
maturity is –0.96%, calculated as follows: The bond portfolio has a modified 
duration of 3.70 and a convexity statistic of 18. Smith expects an average 
benchmark yield-to-maturity change of 0.26%. Smith expects to incur a 
decrease in prices and a reduction in return based on her rate view. The 
expected change in price based on Smith’s views of yields to maturity and 
yield spreads is thus –0.0096 = (–3.70 × 0.0026) + [½ × 18 × (0.0026)2 ]. So, 
the expected reduction in return based on Smith’s rate view is 0.96%.
Smith expects an impact from the 0.1% change (narrowing in this scenario) 
in spread in her well-diversified investment-grade bond portfolio. The im -
pact on the expected return is, therefore, 0.37% = [–3.70 × (–0.0010)] + [1/2 
× 18 × (–0.0010)2 ].
Smith expects the British pound, the foreign currency in which her bond 
position is denominated, to depreciate by an annualized 50 bps (or 0.5%) 
over the investment horizon against the US dollar, the home country cur -
rency. The expected currency loss to the portfolio is thus 0.50%.
The total expected return on Smith’s bond position is 1.91%, as summarized 
in Exhibit 12 .
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 70
Exhibit 12: Return Component Calculations
Return Component Formula Calculation
Coupon income Annual coupon payment/Current bond price £2.75/£97.12 = 2.83%
+ Rolldown return    ( Bond price   End−of−horizon period   −  Bond price   Beginning−of−horizon period  )      ___________________________________________________      Bond price   Beginning−of−horizon period     (£97.27 – £97.12)/£97.12  
= 0.17%
= Rolling yield Coupon income + Rolldown return 2.83% + 0.17% = 3.00%
+/– E(ÄPrice* based on 
Smith’s benchmark yield 
view)(−ModDur × ∆Yield)  
+ [½ × Convexity × (∆Yield)2](−3.70 × 0.0026)  
+ [½ × 18 × (0.0026)2] = –0.96%
+/– E(ÄPrice due to 
investor’s view of yield 
spreads)(−ModDur × ∆Spread)  
+ [½ × Convexity × (∆Spread)2](–3.70 × –0.0010) + [1/2 × 18 × 
(–0.0010)2 ]  
= 0.37%
+/– E(Currency gains or 
losses)Given –0.50%
= Total expected return   1.91%
*Note that the change in price in the context of this example refers to the change in portfolio value.
Estimation of the Inputs
In the model for fixed-income returns discussed earlier, some of the individual 
expected return components can be more easily estimated than others. The easiest 
component to estimate is the coupon income. The return model’s most uncertain 
individual components are the investor’s views of changes in benchmark yields and 
yield spreads and expected currency movements. These components are normally 
based on purely qualitative (subjective) criteria, a quantitative model (including 
surveys), or a mixture of the two. Although a quantitative approach may seem more 
objective, there are several quantitative models that can be used, each with different 
methodologies associated with the underlying calculations.
Limitations of the Expected Return Decomposition
The return decomposition just described is an approximation; only duration and 
convexity are used to summarize the price–yield relationship. In addition, the model 
implicitly assumes that all intermediate cash flows of the bond are reinvested at the yield 
to maturity, which results in different coupon reinvestment rates for different bonds.
The model also ignores other factors, such as local richness/cheapness effects and 
potential financing advantages. Local richness/cheapness effects are deviations of 
individual maturity segments from the fitted yield curve, which were obtained using 
a curve estimation technique. Yield curve estimation techniques produce relatively 
smooth curves, and there are likely slight deviations from the curve in practice. There 
may be financing advantages to certain maturity segments in the repo market. The repo 
market provides a form of short-term borrowing for dealers in government securities 
who sell government bonds to other market participants overnight and buy them 
back, typically on the following day. In most cases, local richness/cheapness effects 
and financing advantages tend to be relatively small and are thus not included in the 
expected return decomposition model.
Leverage 71
COMPONENTS OF EXPECTED RETURN
Kevin Tucker manages a global bond portfolio. At a recent investment 
committee meeting, Tucker discussed his portfolio’s domestic (very 
high-credit-quality) government bond allocation with another committee mem -
ber. The other committee member argued that if the yield curve is expected 
to remain unchanged, the only determinants of a domestic government bond’s 
expected return are its coupon payment and its price.
1. Explain why the other committee member is incorrect, including a descrip -
tion of the additional expected return components that need to be included.
Solution
A bond’s coupon payment and its price allow only its coupon income to be 
computed. Coupon income is an incomplete measure of a bond’s expected 
return. For domestic government bonds, in addition to coupon income, the 
rolldown return needs to be considered. The rolldown return results from 
the fact that bonds are pulled to par as the time to maturity decreases, even 
if the yield curve is expected to remain unchanged over the investment 
horizon. Currency gains and losses would also need to be considered in a 
global portfolio. Because the portfolio consists of government bonds with 
very high credit quality, the view on yield spreads is less relevant for Tuck -
er’s analysis. For government and corporate bonds with lower credit quality, 
however, yield spreads would also need to be considered as additional return 
components.
LEVERAGE
discuss the use of leverage, alternative methods for leveraging, and 
risks that leverage creates in fixed-income portfolios
Leverage is the use of borrowed capital to increase the magnitude of portfolio positions, 
and it is an important tool for fixed-income portfolio managers. By using leverage, 
fixed-income portfolio managers may be able to increase portfolio returns relative to 
what they can achieve in unleveraged portfolios.
Managers often have mandates that place limits on the types of securities they 
may hold. Simultaneously, managers may have return objectives that are difficult to 
achieve, especially during low–interest rate environments. Through the use of lever -
age, a manager can increase his investment exposure and may be able to increase the 
returns to fixed-income asset classes that typically have low returns. The increased 
return potential, however, comes at the cost of increased risk: If losses occur, these 
would be higher than in unleveraged positions.6
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 72
Using Leverage
Leverage increases portfolio returns if the securities in the portfolio have returns higher 
than the cost of borrowing. In an unleveraged portfolio, the return on the portfolio 
(rp) equals the return on invested funds ( rI). When the manager uses leverage, how -
ever, the invested funds exceed the portfolio’s equity by the amount that is borrowed.
The leveraged portfolio return, rp, can be expressed as the total investment gains 
per unit of invested capital:
   r  P   =   Portfolio return   ___________   Portfolio equity   =    r  I   ×  ( V  E   +  V  B  )  −  ( V  B   ×  r  B  )   ___________________    V  E    , 
where
 VE = Value of the portfolio’s  equity
 VB = Borrowed  funds
 rB = Borrowing  rate (cost of borrowing)
 rI = Return on the invested funds (investment  returns)
 rp = Return on the levered portfolio
The numerator represents the total return on the portfolio assets, rI × (VE + VB), 
minus the cost of borrowing, VB × rB, divided by the portfolio’s equity.
The leveraged portfolio return can be decomposed further to better identify the 
effect of leverage on returns:
    r  P   =    r  I   ×  ( V  E   +  V  B  )  −  ( V  B   ×  r  B  )   ___________________    V  E    
    =    ( r  I   ×  V  E  )  +  [ V  B   ×  ( r  I   −  r  B  ) ]   ___________________    V  E        
=  r  I   +    V  B   _  V  E     ( r  I   −  r  B  ) .   
This expression decomposes the leveraged portfolio return into the return on invested 
funds and a portion that accounts for the effect of leverage. If rI > rB, then the second 
term is positive because the rate of return on invested funds exceeds the borrowing 
rate; in this case, leverage increases the portfolio’s return. If rI < rB, then the second 
term is negative because the rate of return on invested funds is less than the borrowing 
rate; in this case, the use of leverage decreases the portfolio’s return. The degree to 
which the leverage increases or decreases portfolio returns is proportional to the use 
of leverage (amount borrowed), VB/VE, and the amount by which investment return 
differs from the cost of borrowing, rI – rB.
Methods for Leveraging Fixed-Income Portfolios
Fixed-income portfolio managers have a variety of tools available to create leveraged 
portfolio exposures—notably, the use of financial derivatives and borrowing via col -
lateralized money markets. Derivatives and borrowing are explicit forms of leverage. 
Other forms of leverage, such as the use of structured financial instruments, are more 
implicit. We provide a description of the most common ones.
Futures Contracts
Futures contracts embed significant leverage because they permit the counterparties 
to gain exposure to a large quantity of the underlying asset without having to transact 
in the underlying. Futures contracts can be obtained for a modest investment that 
Leverage 73
comes in the form of a margin deposit. A futures contract’s notional value equals the 
current value of the underlying asset multiplied by the multiplier, or the quantity of 
the underlying asset controlled by the contract.
The futures leverage is the ratio of the futures exposure (in excess of the margin 
deposit) normalized by the amount of margin required to control the notional amount. 
We can calculate the futures leverage using the following equation:
   Leverage   Futures   =   Notional value  − Margin  __________________   Margin  . 
Swap Agreements
An interest rate swap can be viewed as a portfolio of bonds. In an interest rate swap, 
the fixed-rate payer is effectively short a fixed-rate bond and long a floating-rate bond. 
When interest rates increase, the value of the swap to the fixed-rate payer increases 
because the present value of the fixed-rate liability decreases, and the floating-rate 
payments received increase. The fixed-rate receiver in the interest rate swap agree -
ment effectively has a long position in a fixed-rate bond and a short position in a 
floating-rate bond. If interest rates decline, the value of the swap to the fixed-rate 
receiver increases because the present value of the fixed-rate asset increases, and the 
floating-rate payments made decrease.
Because interest rate swaps are economically equivalent to a long–short bond 
portfolio, they provide leveraged exposure to bonds; the only capital required to 
enter into swap agreements is collateral required by the counterparties. Collateral for 
interest rate swap agreements has historically occurred between the two (or more) 
counterparties in the transaction. Increasingly, collateral for interest rate and other 
swaps occurs through central clearinghouses.
Repurchase Agreements
Repurchase agreements  (repos) are an important source of short-term financing 
for fixed-income security dealers and other financial institutions, as evidenced by 
the trillions of dollars of repo transactions that take place annually. In a repurchase 
agreement, a security owner agrees to sell a security for a specific cash amount while 
simultaneously agreeing to repurchase the security at a specified future date (typi -
cally one day later) and price. Repos are thus effectively collateralized loans. When 
discussing a repo, the transaction normally refers to the borrower’s standpoint; from 
the standpoint of the lender (such as a money market fund), these agreements are 
referred to as reverse repos . Exhibit 13  illustrates the transaction.
The interest rate on a repurchase agreement, called the repo rate , is the difference 
between the security’s selling price and its repurchase price. For example, consider a 
dealer wishing to finance a EUR15 million bond position with a repurchase agreement. 
The dealer enters an overnight repo at a repo rate of 5%. We can compute the price 
at which she agrees to repurchase this bond after one day as the EUR15 million value 
today plus one day of interest. The interest amount is computed as follows:
 Dollar interest = Principal amount × Repo rate × (Term of repo in days/360).
Continuing with the example, the dollar interest is EUR2,083.33 = EUR15 million × 5% 
× (1/360). Thus, the dealer will repurchase the bond the next day for EUR15,002,083.33.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 74
Exhibit 13: Repo and Reverse Repo
Time 0
Time 1(repo transaction) (rever se repo
transaction)EUR 15,000,000
Borrower Lender
EUR 15,002,083Government bond
Government bond
The term, or length, of a repurchase agreement is measured in days. Overnight repos 
are common, although they are often rolled over to create longer-term funding. A repo 
agreement may be cash driven or security driven. Cash-driven transactions feature 
one party that owns bonds and wants to borrow cash, as in the foregoing example. 
Cash-driven transactions usually feature “general collateral”—securities commonly 
accepted by investors and dealers, such as Treasury bonds. In a security-driven 
transaction, the lender typically seeks a particular security. The motives may be for 
hedging, arbitrage, or speculation.
Credit risk is a concern for the counterparty that lends capital in a repo agreement. 
Protection against a default by the borrower is provided by the underlying collateral 
bonds. Additional credit protection comes from the “haircut, ” the amount by which 
the collateral’s value exceeds the repo principal amount. For example, haircuts for 
high-quality government bonds typically range from 1% to 3% and are higher for 
other types of bonds. The size of the haircut serves to not only protect the lender 
against a potential default by the borrower but also to limit the borrower’s net lever -
age capacity. Generally, the size of the haircut increases as the price volatility of the 
underlying collateral increases.
Repos are categorized as bilateral repos or tri-party repos, depending on the way 
they are settled. Bilateral repos are conducted directly between two institutions, and 
settlement is typically conducted as “delivery versus payment, ” meaning that the 
exchanges of cash and collateral occur simultaneously through a central custodian 
(for example, the Depository Trust Company in the United States). Bilateral repos 
are usually used for security-driven transactions. Tri-party repo transactions involve 
a third party that provides settlement and collateral management services. Most 
cash-motivated repo transactions against general collateral are conducted as tri-party 
repo transactions.
Security Lending
Security lending is another form of collateralized lending and is closely linked to the 
repo market. The primary motive of security lending transactions is to facilitate short 
sales, which involve the sale of securities the seller does not own. A short seller must 
borrow the securities he has sold short to deliver them upon trade settlement. Another 
motive for security lending transactions is financing, or collateralized borrowing. In a 
financing-motivated security loan, a bond owner lends the bond to another investor 
in exchange for cash.
Leverage 75
Security lending transactions are collateralized by cash or high-credit-quality 
bonds. In the United States, most transactions feature cash collateral, although in 
many other countries, highly rated bonds are used as collateral. Typically, security 
lenders require collateral valued more than the value of the borrowed securities when 
bonds are used as collateral. For example, if high-quality government bonds are used 
as collateral, the lender may require bonds valued at 102% of the value of the bor -
rowed securities. The extra 2% functions in the same way as the haircut in the repo 
market, providing extra protection against borrower default. The collateral required 
will increase if lower-quality bonds are used as collateral.
In security lending transactions with cash collateral, the security borrower typi -
cally pays the security lender, typically a long-only investment fund, a fee equal to a 
percentage of the value of the securities loaned. For securities that are readily available 
for lending, that fee is small. The security lender earns an additional return by rein -
vesting the cash collateral. In cases where the security loan is initiated for financing 
purposes, the lending fee is typically negative, indicating that the security lender pays 
the security borrower a fee in exchange for its use of the cash.
When bonds are posted as collateral, the income earned on the collateral usually 
exceeds the security lending rate; the security lender (who is in possession of the bonds 
as collateral) usually repays the security borrower a portion of the interest earned on 
the bond collateral. The term rebate rate  refers to the portion of the collateral earnings 
rate that is repaid to the security borrower by the security lender. This relationship 
can be expressed as follows:
 Rebate rate = Collateral  earnings rate – Security lending rate.
When securities are difficult to borrow, typically because there is high demand to 
short those securities, the rebate rate may be negative, which means the fee for bor -
rowing the securities is greater than the return earned on the collateral. In this case, 
the security borrower pays a fee to the security lender in addition to foregoing the 
interest earned on the collateral.
There are important differences between repurchase agreements and security 
lending transactions. Unlike repurchase agreements, security lending transactions 
are typically open-ended. The security lender may recall the securities at any time, 
forcing the borrower to deliver the bonds by buying them back or borrowing from 
another lender. Similarly, the borrower may deliver the borrowed securities back to 
the lender at any time, forcing the lender, or its agent, to return the collateral (cash 
or bonds) and search for another borrower.
Risks of Leverage
Leverage alters the risk–return properties of an investment portfolio. A heavily lev -
eraged portfolio may incur significant losses even when portfolio assets suffer only 
moderate valuation declines.
Leverage can lead to forced liquidations. If the value of the portfolio decreases, the 
portfolio’s equity relative to borrowing levels is reduced and the portfolio’s leverage 
increases. Portfolio assets may be sold to pay off borrowing and reduce leverage. If 
portfolio assets are not liquidated, then the overall leverage increases, corresponding to 
higher levels of risk. Decreases in portfolio value can lead to forced liquidations even 
if market conditions are unfavorable for selling—for example, during crisis periods. 
The term “fire sale” refers to forced liquidations at prices that are below fair value 
because of the seller’s need for immediate liquidation. Reducing leverage, declining 
asset values, and forced sales have the potential to create spiraling effects that can 
result in severe declines in values and reduction in market liquidity.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 76
Additionally, reassessments of counterparty risk typically occur during extreme 
market conditions, such as during the 2008–09 Global Financial Crisis. During periods 
of financial crisis, counterparties to short-term financing arrangements, such as credit 
lines, repurchase agreements, and security lending agreements, may withdraw their 
financing. These withdrawals undermine the ability of leveraged market participants 
to maintain their investment exposures. Thus, leveraged investors may be forced to 
reduce their investment exposure at exactly the worst time—that is, when prices are 
depressed.
USING LEVERAGE IN A FIXED-INCOME PORTFOLIO
1. Arturo manages a mutual fund that is benchmarked to the Global 
Aggregate Bond Index. He currently has a bullish view of the global econo -
my and believes corporate bond spreads are attractive. He is bearish on US 
Treasury interest rates given his economic growth forecast and expects rates 
to increase. The fund’s US corporate bond holdings have a duration of seven 
years. He believes the best opportunities are in emerging market securi -
ties, and he is bullish on Brazilian rates, expecting them to decrease. The 
fund has experienced strong inflows recently and is fully invested. Arturo 
is evaluating ways to potentially increase the fund’s total return by creating 
leveraged fixed-income exposures.
Given Arturo’s plan to leverage exposures in his fund, discuss how he would 
achieve his objectives and identify the strategy risks. 
Solution
The mutual fund is fully invested; therefore, Arturo needs to use leverage to 
potentially increase his returns. His bearish view on US Treasury interest 
rates would require that he reduce the fund’s seven-year duration contrib -
uted by the US corporate bond holdings. He can sell the number of futures 
contracts on US Treasuries, whose notional value and associated duration 
would offset the duration of the corporate bonds to his new target dura -
tion. Doing so would allow him to retain exposure (spread duration) to the 
corporate bonds, whose spreads may contract as the economy grows while 
shedding the interest rate exposure, since he believes rates will rise, adverse -
ly affecting bond prices.
Arturo’s bullish view on Brazilian rates can be expressed by entering into a 
receive fixed-rate, pay floating-rate swap on Brazilian rates. The fund will ef -
fectively have the equivalent of a fixed-rate bond that will appreciate in price 
if his view that Brazilian interest rates will fall materializes.
Both the short US Treasury futures and long Brazilian interest rate swap po -
sitions are leveraged since the only capital used is the collateral required by 
the counterparties. The risk to the leveraged strategy is that if Arturo’s view 
on either position turns out to be incorrect, losses are magnified. This may 
also require positions to be closed and assets sold to cover the losses, which 
may occur at an inopportune time if the markets have sold off.
Fixed-Income Portfolio Taxation 77
FIXED-INCOME PORTFOLIO TAXATION
discuss differences in managing fixed-income portfolios for taxable 
and tax-exempt investors
A tax-exempt investor’s objective is to achieve the highest possible risk-adjusted 
returns net of fees and transaction costs. A prudent taxable investor needs to also 
consider the effects of taxes on both expected and realized net investment returns.
The investment management industry has traditionally made investment deci -
sions based on pretax returns as though investors are tax exempt (such as pension 
funds in many countries; see Rogers [2006] ). Most of the world’s investable assets, 
however, are owned by taxable investors, who are concerned with after-tax, rather 
than pretax, returns.
Taxes may differ among investor types, among countries, and based on income 
source, such as interest or capital gains. In many countries, pension funds are exempt 
from taxes, but corporations generally have to pay tax on their investments. Many 
countries make some allowance for tax-sheltered investments that individuals can use 
(up to certain limits). These types of tax shelters generally offer either an exemption 
from tax on investment income or a deferral of taxes until an investor draws money 
from the shelter (usually after retirement). Such shelters allow returns to accrue on a 
pretax basis until retirement, which can provide substantial benefits. In a fixed-income 
context for taxable investors, coupon payments (interest income) are typically taxed at 
the investor’s normal income tax rate. Capital gains, however, may be taxed at a lower 
effective rate than an investor’s normal income tax rate. In some countries, income 
from special types of fixed-income securities, such as bonds issued by a sovereign 
government, a non-sovereign government, or various government agencies, may be 
taxed at a lower effective rate, or even not taxed.
Specific tax rules vary among jurisdictions. Any discussion of the effect of taxes 
on investor returns—and, therefore, on how portfolios should optimally be managed 
for taxable investors—is especially challenging if it needs to apply on a global level. 
Although accounting standards have become more harmonized globally, any kind of 
tax harmonization among countries is not likely to occur anytime soon. An inves -
tor should consider how taxes affect investment income in the country where the 
income is earned and how the investment income is treated when it is repatriated 
to the investor’s home country. Treaties between countries may affect tax treatment 
of investment income. Taxes are complicated and can make investment decisions 
difficult. Portfolio managers who manage assets for taxable individual investors, as 
opposed to tax-exempt investors, need to consider a few issues.
Principles of Fixed-Income Taxation
Although tax codes differ among jurisdictions, there are certain principles that most 
tax codes have in common regarding taxation of fixed-income investments:
 ■The two primary sources of investment income that affect taxes for fixed-in -
come securities are coupon payments (interest income) and capital gains or 
losses.
 ■In general, tax is payable only on capital gains and interest income that 
have been received. In some countries, an exception to this rule applies 
to zero-coupon bonds. Imputed interest that is taxed throughout a 7
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 78
zero-coupon bond’s life may be calculated. This method of taxation ensures 
that tax is paid over the bond’s life and that the return on a zero-coupon 
bond is not taxed entirely as a capital gain.
 ■Capital gains are frequently taxed at a lower effective tax rate than interest 
income.
 ■Capital losses generally cannot be used to reduce sources of income other 
than capital gains. Capital losses reduce capital gains in the tax year in 
which they occur. If capital losses exceed capital gains in the year, they can 
often be “carried forward” and applied to gains in future years; in some 
countries, losses may also be “carried back” to reduce capital gains taxes 
paid in prior years. Limits on the number of years that capital losses can be 
carried forward or back typically exist.
 ■In some countries, short-term capital gains are taxed at a different (usually 
higher) rate than long-term capital gains.
An investor or portfolio manager generally has no control over the timing of when 
coupon income is received, and the related income tax must be paid. However, he 
or she can generally decide the timing of the sale of investments and, therefore, has 
some control over the timing of realized capital gains and losses. This control can be 
valuable for a taxable investor because it may be optimal to delay realizing gains and 
related tax payments and to realize losses as early as possible. This type of tax-driven 
strategic behavior is referred to as tax-loss harvesting.
Key points for managing taxable fixed-income portfolios include the following:
 ■Selectively offset capital gains and losses for tax purposes.
 ■If short-term capital gains tax rates are higher than long-term capital gains 
tax rates, then be judicious when realizing short-term gains.
 ■Realize losses considering tax consequences. They may be used to offset 
current or future capital gains for tax purposes.
 ■Control turnover in the fund. In general, the lower the turnover, the longer 
capital gains tax payments can be deferred.
 ■Consider the trade-off between capital gains and income for tax purposes.
Investment Vehicles and Taxes
The choice of investment vehicle often affects how investments are taxed at the final 
investor level. In a pooled investment vehicle (sometimes referred to as a collective 
investment scheme ), such as a mutual fund, interest income is generally taxed at the 
final investor level when it occurs—regardless of whether the fund reinvests interest 
income or pays it out to investors. In other words, for tax purposes the fund is consid -
ered to have distributed interest income for tax purposes in the year it is received even 
if it does not actually pay it out to investors. Taxation of capital gains arising from the 
individual investments within a fund is often treated differently in different countries.
Some countries, such as the United States, use what is known as pass-through 
treatment  of capital gains in mutual funds. Realized net capital gains in the underlying 
securities of a fund are treated as if distributed to investors in the year that they arise, 
and investors need to include the gains on their tax returns. Other countries, such as 
the United Kingdom, do not use pass-through treatment. Realized capital gains aris -
ing within a fund increase the net asset value of the fund shares that investors hold. 
Investors pay taxes on the net capital gain when they sell their fund shares. This tax 
treatment leads to a deferral in capital gains tax payments. A UK portfolio manager’s 
decisions on when to realize capital gains or losses do not affect the timing of tax 
payments on capital gains by investors.
Fixed-Income Portfolio Taxation 79
In a separately managed account, an investor typically pays tax on realized gains 
in the underlying securities at the time they occur. The investor holds the securities 
directly rather than through shares in a fund. For separately managed accounts, the 
portfolio manager needs to consider tax consequences for the investor when making 
investment decisions.
Tax-loss harvesting, which we defined earlier as deferring the realization of gains 
and realizing capital losses early, allows investors to accumulate gains on a pretax 
basis. The deferral of taxes increases the present value of investments for the investor.
MANAGING TAXABLE AND TAX-EXEMPT PORTFOLIOS
A bond portfolio manager needs to raise €10,000,000 in cash to cover 
outflows in the portfolio she manages. To satisfy her cash demands, 
she considers one of two corporate bond positions for potential liquidation: 
Position A and Position B. For tax purposes, capital gains receive pass-through 
treatment; realized net capital gains in the underlying securities of a fund are 
treated as if distributed to investors in the year that they arise. Assume that the 
capital gains tax rate is 28% and the income tax rate for interest is 45%. Exhibit 
14 provides relevant data for the two bond positions.
Exhibit 14: Selected Data for Two Bonds
 
  Position A Position B
Current market value €10,000,000 €10,000,000
Capital gain/loss €1,000,000 –€1,000,000
Coupon rate 5.00% 5.00%
Remaining maturity 10 years 10 years
Income tax rate 45%
Capital gains tax rate 28%
 
The portfolio manager considers Position A to be slightly overvalued and 
Position B to be slightly undervalued. Assume that the two bond positions are 
identical regarding all other relevant characteristics. How should the portfolio 
manager optimally liquidate bond positions if she manages the portfolio for 
the following investors?
1. How should the portfolio manager optimally liquidate bond positions if she 
manages the portfolio for tax-exempt investors?
Solution
The taxation of capital gains and capital losses has minimal consequences 
for tax-exempt investors. Consistent with the portfolio manager’s invest -
ment views, the portfolio manager would likely liquidate Position A, which 
she considers slightly overvalued, rather than liquidating Position B, which 
she considers slightly undervalued.
2. How should the portfolio manager optimally liquidate bond positions if she 
manages the portfolio for taxable investors?
Solution
All else equal, portfolio managers for taxable investors should have an 
incentive to defer capital gains taxes and realize capital losses early (tax-
loss harvesting) so that losses can be used to offset current or future capital 
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 80
gains. Despite the slight undervaluation of the position, the portfolio 
manager might want to liquidate Position B because of its embedded capital 
loss, which will result in a lower realized net capital gain being distributed 
to investors. This decision assumes that there are no other capital losses in 
the portfolio that can be used to offset other capital gains. Despite the slight 
overvaluation of Position A, its liquidation would be less desirable for a 
taxable investor because of the required capital gains tax.
LIABILITY-DRIVEN INVESTING 
describe liability-driven investing 
Let us start with the example of a 45-year-old investor who plans to retire at age 65 
and who would like to secure a stable stream of income thereafter. It is quite probable 
that he currently has a diversified portfolio that includes bonds, equities, and possi -
bly other asset classes. Our focus here is on the fixed-income portion of his overall 
portfolio. We will assume that the investor builds the bond portfolio (immediately) 
and will add to it each year. Upon retirement, he plans to sell the bonds and buy an 
annuity that will pay a fixed benefit for his remaining lifetime. This investor’s initial 
20-year time horizon is critical to identifying and measuring the impact on retirement 
income arising from future interest rate volatility, and it forms the initial frame of 
reference for understanding and dealing with interest rate risk. 
More generally, the frame of reference is in the form of a balance sheet of 
rate-sensitive assets and liabilities. In the example of the 45-year-old investor, the 
asset is the growing bond portfolio, and the liability is the present value of the annuity 
that the investor requires to satisfy the fixed lifetime benefit. 
Liability-Driven Investing vs. Asset-Driven Liabilities 
Liability-driven investing (LDI) and asset-driven liabilities (ADL) are special cases 
of ALM. The key difference is that with ADL, the assets are given, and the liabilities 
are structured to manage interest rate risk; whereas with LDI, which is much more 
common, the liabilities are given, and the assets are managed. As an example of LDI, 
a life insurance company acquires a liability portfolio based on the insurance policies 
underwritten by its sales force. Another example involves the future employee benefits 
promised by a defined benefit pension plan, which create a portfolio of rate-sensitive 
liabilities. In each circumstance, the liabilities are defined and result from routine 
business and financial management decisions. The present value of those liabilities 
depends on current interest rates (as well as other factors). A life insurance or pension 
manager will use the estimated interest rate sensitivity of plan liabilities as a starting 
point when making investment portfolio decisions. This process often requires building 
a model for the liabilities. 
With ADL, the asset side of the balance sheet results from a company’s under -
lying businesses, and the debt manager seeks a liability structure to reduce interest 
rate risk. One example might be a leasing company with short-term contracts that 
chooses to finance itself with short-term debt. The company is aiming to match the 
maturities of its assets and liabilities to minimize risk. Alternatively, a manufacturing 
company might identify that its operating revenues are highly correlated with the 
business cycle. Monetary policy is typically managed so there is positive correlation 8
Liability-Driven Investing  81
between interest rates and the business cycle. Central banks lower policy rates when 
the economy is weak and raise them when it is strong. Therefore, this company has a 
natural preference for variable-rate liabilities so that operating revenue and interest 
expense rise and fall together. 
Types of Liabilities 
An LDI strategy starts with analyzing the size and timing of the entity’s liabilities. 
Exhibit 15  shows a classification scheme for this analysis. 
Exhibit 15: Classification of Liabilities 
Liability
TypeAmoun t
of Cash
Outla yTiming
of Cash
Outla yE xamples
Type I Known Known Traditional fixed-income
bond with no embedded
optionsMacDur , ModDur , mone y
duration, and the PVBP
can be used to  measur e
the in terest ra te sensitivit y
Effective duration needed
to estimat e interest ra te
sensitivity . Calculat ed
using a model f or:
• Uncertain amoun t
 and/ or timing of the
 cash flows
• Initial assumption
 about the yield curv eType II Known Uncertain Callable and putable bonds
Term lif e insurance polic y
(timing of death unk own)
Type III Uncertain Known Floating-rat e not e-interest
payments depend on f uture
interest ra tes
Inflation-pr otected securities-
amounts of in terest and
principal payments tied to
inflation
Type IV Uncertain Uncertain Property  and casualty
insurance (weather  events
difficult to  predict)
Note that effective duration is needed with Types II, III, and IV liabilities, based on 
initial assumptions about the yield curve. Then, the yield curve is shifted up and 
down to obtain new estimates for the present value of the liabilities. We demonstrate 
this process later for the sponsor of a defined benefit pension plan, which is another 
example of an entity with Type IV liabilities. 
EXAMPLE 1
Modern Mortgage, a savings bank, decides to establish an ALCO (asset–liabil -
ity committee) to improve risk management and coordination of its loan and 
deposit rate–setting processes. Modern’s primary assets are long-term, fixed-rate, 
monthly payment, fully amortizing residential mortgage loans. The mortgage 
loans are prime quality and have loan-to-value ratios that average 80%. The 
loans are pre-payable at par value by the homeowners at no fee. Modern also 
holds a portfolio of non-callable, fixed-income government bonds (considered 
free of default risk) of varying maturities to manage its liquidity needs. The 
primary liabilities are demand and time deposits that are fully guaranteed by a 
government deposit insurance fund. The demand deposits are redeemable by 
check or debit card. The time deposits have fixed rates and maturities ranging 
from 90 days to three years and are redeemable before maturity at a small fee. 
The banking-sector regulator in the country in which Modern operates has 
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 82
introduced a new capital requirement for savings banks. In accordance with the 
requirement, contingent convertible long-term bonds are issued by the savings 
bank and sold to institutional investors. The key feature is that if defaults on 
the mortgage loans reach a certain level or the savings bank’s capital ratio drops 
below a certain level, as determined by the regulator, the bonds convert to equity 
at a specified price per share. 
As a first step, the ALCO needs to identify the types of assets and liabilities 
that comprise its balance sheet using the classification scheme in Exhibit 15 . Type 
I has certain amounts and dates for its cash flows; Type II has known amounts 
but uncertain dates; Type III has specified dates but unknown amounts; and 
Type IV has uncertain amounts and dates. 
1. Specify and explain the classification scheme for residential mortgage loans 
Solution
Residential mortgage loans are Type IV assets to the savings bank. The 
timing of interest and principal cash flows is uncertain because of the pre -
payment option held by the homeowner. This type of call option is complex. 
Homeowners might elect to prepay for many reasons, including sale of 
the property as well as the opportunity to refinance if interest rates come 
down. Therefore, a prepayment model is needed to project the timing of 
future cash flows. Default risk also affects the projected amount of the cash 
flow for each date. Even if the average  loan-to-value ratio is 80%, indicating 
high-quality mortgages, some loans could have higher ratios and be more 
subject to default, especially if home prices decline. 
2. Specify and explain the classification scheme for government bonds 
Solution
Fixed-rate government bonds are Type I assets because the coupon and 
principal payment dates and amounts are determined at issuance. 
3. Specify and explain the classification scheme for demand and time deposits 
Solution
Demand and time deposits are Type II liabilities from the savings bank’s 
perspective. The deposit amounts are known, but the depositor can redeem 
the deposits prior to maturity, creating uncertainty about timing. 
4. Specify and explain the classification scheme for contingent convertible 
bonds 
Solution
The contingent convertible bonds are Type IV liabilities. The presence of 
the conversion option makes both the amount and timing of cash flows 
uncertain. 
Managing the Interest Rate Risk of Multiple Liabilities  83
MANAGING THE INTEREST RATE RISK OF MULTIPLE 
LIABILITIES 
describe the strategy of cash flow matching
The principle of interest rate immunization applies to multiple liabilities in addition 
to a single liability. For now, we continue to assume that these are Type I cash flows 
in that the scheduled amounts and payment dates are known to the asset manager. 
In this section, we discuss two approaches to manage these liabilities: 
 ■Cash flow matching , which entails building a dedicated portfolio of 
zero-coupon or fixed-income bonds to ensure that there are sufficient cash 
inflows to pay the scheduled cash outflows (a related concept, the so-called 
“laddered portfolio, ” also falls into the cash flow matching category of 
approaches); 
 ■Duration matching , which extends the ideas of the previous section to a 
portfolio of debt liabilities. 
Cash Flow Matching 
A classic strategy to eliminate the interest rate risk arising from multiple liabilities 
is to build a dedicated asset portfolio of high-quality fixed-income bonds that, as 
closely as possible, matches the amount and timing of the scheduled cash outflows. 
“Dedicated” means that the bonds are placed in a held-to-maturity portfolio. A nat -
ural question is, if the entity has enough cash to build the dedicated bond portfolio, 
why not just use that cash to buy back and retire the liabilities? The answer is that 
the buyback strategy is difficult and costly to implement if the bonds are widely held 
by buy-and-hold institutional and retail investors. Most corporate bonds are rather 
illiquid, so buying them back on the open market is likely to drive up the purchase 
price. Cash flow matching can be a better use of the available cash assets. 
A corporate finance motivation for cash flow matching is to improve the company’s 
credit rating. The entity has sufficient cash assets to retire the debt liabilities, and ded -
icating the bonds effectively accomplishes that objective. Under some circumstances, 
a corporation might even be able to remove both the dedicated asset portfolio and the 
debt liabilities from its balance sheet through the process of accounting defeasance. 
Also called in-substance defeasance, accounting defeasance is a way of extinguishing a 
debt obligation by setting aside sufficient high-quality securities, such as US Treasury 
notes, to repay the liability. 
Panel A in Exhibit 16  illustrates the dedicated cash flow matching asset portfolio. 
These assets could be zero-coupon bonds or traditional fixed-income securities. Panel 
B represents the amount and timing of the debt liabilities. The amounts are the sum of 
the coupon and principal payments of debt securities on a hypothetical balance sheet. 9
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 84
Exhibit 16: Cash Flow Matching 
120,000,000
100,000,000
80,000,000
60,000,000
40,000,000
20,000,000
0
12 34 56 78 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 92 0Panel A: Dedicated assets
20,000,000
0
–20,000,000
–40,000,000
–60,000,000
–80,000,000
–100,000,000
–120,000,00012 34 56 78 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 92 0Panel B: Debt liabilities
A concern when implementing this strategy is the cash-in-advance constraint . That 
means securities are not sold to meet obligations; instead, sufficient funds must be 
available on or before each liability payment date to meet the obligation. The design 
of traditional bonds—a fixed coupon rate and principal redemption at maturity—is a 
problem if the liability stream, unlike in Exhibit 16 , is a level payment annuity. That 
scenario could lead to large cash holdings between payment dates and, therefore, cash 
flow reinvestment risk, especially if yields on high-quality, short-term investments are 
low (or worse, negative). 
EXAMPLE 2
Alfred Simonsson is assistant treasurer at a Swedish lumber company. The 
company has sold a large tract of land and now has sufficient cash holdings to 
retire some of its debt liabilities. The company’s accounting department assures 
Alfred that its external auditors will approve of a defeasement strategy if Swedish 
government bonds are purchased to match the interest and principal payments 
on the liabilities. Following is the schedule of payments due on the debt as of 
June Year 1 that the company plans to defease:
Managing the Interest Rate Risk of Multiple Liabilities  85
 
June Year 2 SEK3,710,000
June Year 3 SEK6,620,000
June Year 4 SEK4,410,000
June Year 5 SEK5,250,000
 
The following Swedish government bonds are available. Interest on the bonds 
is paid annually in May of each year.
 
Coupon Rate Maturity Date
2.75% May Year 2
3.50% May Year 3
4.75% May Year 4
5.50% May Year 5
 
1. How much in par value for each government bond will Alfred need to buy 
to defease the debt liabilities, assuming that the minimum denomination in 
each security is SEK10,000?
Solution
The cash flow matching portfolio is built by starting with the last liability 
of SEK5,250,000 in June Year 5. If there were no minimum denomination, 
that liability could be funded with the 5.50% bonds due May Year 5 having 
a par value of SEK4,976,303 (= SEK5,250,000/1.0550). To deal with the 
constraint, however, Alfred buys SEK4,980,000 in par value. That bond pays 
SEK5,253,900 (= SEK4,980,000 × 1.0550) at maturity. This holding also pays 
SEK273,900 (= SEK4,980,000 × 0.0550) in coupon interest in May Year 2, 3, 
and 4.
Then move to the June Year 4 obligation, which is SEK4,136,100 after 
subtracting the SEK273,900 received on the 5.50% bond: SEK4,410,000 – 
SEK273,900 = SEK4,136,100. Alfred buys SEK3,950,000 in par value of the 
4.75% bond due May Year 4. That bond pays SEK4,137,625 (= SEK3,950,000 
× 1.0475) at maturity and SEK187,625 in interest in May Year 2 and Year 3.
The net obligation in June Year 3 is SEK6,158,475 (= SEK6,620,000 – 
SEK273,900 – SEK187,625) after subtracting the interest received on the 
longer-maturity bonds. The company can buy SEK5,950,000 in par value of 
the 3.50% bond due May Year 3. At maturity, this bond pays SEK6,158,250 
(= SEK5,950,000 × 1.0350). The small shortfall of SEK225 (= SEK6,158,475 – 
SEK6,158,250) can be made up because the funds received in May are rein -
vested until June. This bond also pays SEK208,250 in interest in May Year 2.
Finally, Alfred needs to buy SEK2,960,000 in par value of the 2.75% bond 
due May Year 2. This bond pays SEK3,041,400 (= SEK2,960,000 × 1.0275) in 
May Year 2. The final coupon and principal, plus the interest on the 5.50%, 
4.75%, and 3.50% bonds, total SEK3,711,175 (= SEK3,041,400 + SEK273,900 
+ SEK187,625 + SEK208,250). That amount is used to pay off the June Year 
2 obligation of SEK3,710,000. Note that the excess could be kept in a bank 
account to cover the Year 3 shortfall.
In sum, Alfred buys the following portfolio:
 
Bond Par Value
2.75% due May Year 2 SEK2,960,000
3.50% due May Year 3 SEK5,950,000
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 86
Bond Par Value
4.75% due May Year 4 SEK3,950,000
5.50% due May Year 5 SEK4,980,000
 
The following chart illustrates the cash flow matching bond portfolio: Each 
bar represents the par amount of a bond maturing in that year plus coupon 
payments from bonds maturing in later years.
Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5Final coupon and
principal of the
bond maturing
in Year 2
Coupon paymens
from the Year 3,
Year 4 and
Year 5 bonds
LADDERED PORTFOLIOS 
describe construction, benefits, limitations, and risk–return 
characteristics of a laddered bond portfolio
A popular fixed-income investment strategy in the wealth management industry is to 
build a “laddered” portfolio for clients. Exhibit 17  illustrates this approach, along with 
two other maturity-based strategies—a “bullet” portfolio and a “barbell” portfolio. The 
laddered portfolio spreads the bonds’ maturities and par values evenly along the yield 
curve. The bullet portfolio concentrates the bonds at a particular point on the yield 
curve, whereas the barbell portfolio places the bonds at the short-term and long-term 
ends of the curve. In principle, each can have the same portfolio duration statistic 
and approximately the same change in value for a parallel shift in the yield curve. A 
non-parallel shift or a twist in the curve, however, leads to very different outcomes 
for the bullet and barbell structures. An obvious advantage to the laddered portfolio 
is protection from shifts and twists—the cash flows are essentially “diversified” across 
the time spectrum. 10
Laddered Portfolios  87
Exhibit 17: Laddered, Bullet, and Barbell Fixed-Income Portfolios 
Panel A: Laddered Protfolio
Time to Maturity
Panel B: Bullet Protfolio
Time to Maturity
Panel C: Barbell Protfolio
Time to Maturity
Benefits of Using Laddered Portfolios 
This “diversification” over time provides the investor a balanced position between the 
two sources of interest rate risk—cash flow reinvestment and market price volatility. 
Bonds mature each year and are reinvested at the longer-term end of the ladder, 
typically at higher rates than short-term securities. Over time, the laddered portfolio 
likely includes bonds that were purchased at high interest rates as well as low interest 
rates. Investors familiar with “dollar cost averaging” will see the similarity. In addition, 
reinvesting funds as bonds mature maintains the duration of the overall portfolio. 
Another attractive feature to the laddered portfolio apparent in Exhibit 17  is in 
convexity. Convexity, technically, is the second-order effect on the value of an asset 
or liability given a change in the yield to maturity. Importantly, it is affected by the 
dispersion of cash flows, as indicated in the following equation: 
  Immunized Portfolio Convexity  =    MacDur    2  + MacDur  + Dispersion   ________________________    (1 + Cash flow yield)    2   . 
If the three portfolios have the same duration (and cash flow yield), then the barbell 
clearly has the highest convexity and the bullet the lowest. The laddered portfolio 
will tend to have relatively high convexity because its cash flows by design are spread 
over the timeline. Compared with the barbell, the laddered portfolio has much less 
cash flow reinvestment risk. 
In practice, perhaps the most desirable aspect of the laddered portfolio is in liquidity 
management. This aspect is particularly relevant if the bonds are not actively traded, 
as is the case for many corporate securities. As time passes, there is always a bond that 
is close to redemption. Its duration will be low so that its price is fairly stable even in a 
time of interest rate volatility. If the client needs immediate cash, the soon-to-mature 
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 88
bond makes for high-quality collateral on a personal loan or, for an institution, a repo 
contract. As the bonds mature, the final coupon and principal can be deployed for 
consumption or reinvested in a long-term bond at the back of the ladder. 
Using ETFs to Build Laddered Portfolios 
Another way for a wealth manager to build a laddered portfolio for a client is to use 
fixed-maturity corporate bond exchange-traded funds (ETFs). These ETFs have a des -
ignated year of maturity and credit risk profile—for instance, 2024 investment-grade 
corporate bonds. The passively managed, low-cost ETF seeks to replicate the perfor -
mance of an index of, for instance, 50 held-to-maturity investment-grade corporate 
bonds that mature in 2021. As discussed in previous sections, the ETF manager can 
use a stratified sampling approach to track the index. 
Suppose that in 2021, the wealth manager buys for the client roughly equal posi -
tions in the 2022 through 2029 fixed-maturity corporate bond ETFs. These purchases 
create a laddered portfolio that should provide the same benefits as holding the bonds 
directly—price stability in the soonest-to-mature ETF and greater convexity than 
holding more of a bullet portfolio. Moreover, the ETFs should be more liquid than 
positions in the actual bonds. 
But laddered portfolios are not without limitations. For many investors, the deci -
sion to build a laddered bond portfolio should be weighed against buying shares in a 
fixed-income mutual fund, especially if the portfolio consists of a limited number of 
corporate bonds. Clearly, the mutual fund provides greater diversification of default 
risk. Moreover, actual bonds can entail a much higher cost of acquisition. If the entire 
investment needs to be liquidated, the mutual fund shares can be redeemed more 
quickly than the bonds can be sold, and likely at a better price.
EXAMPLE 3
Mr. Zheng is a Shanghai-based wealth adviser. A major client of his, the Wang 
family, holds most of its assets in residential property and equity investments 
and relies on regular cash flows from those holdings. Zheng recommends that 
the Wang family also have a laddered portfolio of Chinese government bonds. 
He suggests the portfolio shown in Exhibit 18 , priced for settlement on 1 January 
2021.
 
Exhibit 18: Zheng’s Suggested Portfolio
 
 
Coupon 
RatePayment 
Frequency Maturity Flat Price Yield (s.a.)Par Value 
(CNY) Market Value (CNY)
3.22% Annual 26-Mar-22 101.7493 1.758% 10 million 10,422,826
3.14% Annual 8-Sept-24 102.1336 2.508% 10 million 10,312,292
3.05% Annual 22-Oct-26 101.4045 2.764% 10 million 10,199,779
2.99% Semi-annual 15-Oct-29 101.4454 2.803% 10 million 10,208,611
40 million 41,143,508
 
The yields to maturity on the first three bonds have been converted from a 
periodicity of one to two in order to report them on a consistent semi-annual 
bond basis, as indicated by “(s.a.). ” The total market value of the portfolio is 
CNY41,143,508. The cash flow yield for the portfolio is 2.661%, whereas the 
market value-weighted average yield is 2.455%.
Most important for his presentation to the senior members of the Wang 
family is the schedule for the 30 cash flows:
Laddered Portfolios  89
 
1 26-Mar-21 322,000 16 8-Sep-24 10,314,000
2 15-Apr-21 149,500 17 15-Oct-24 149,500
3 8-Sep-21 314,000 18 22-Oct-24 305,000
4 15-Oct-21 149,500 19 15-Apr-25 149,500
5 22-Oct-21 305,000 20 15-Oct-25 149,500
6 26-Mar-22 10,322,000 21 22-Oct-25 305,000
7 15-Apr-22 149,500 22 15-Apr-26 149,500
8 8-Sep-22 314,000 23 15-Oct-26 149,500
9 15-Oct-22 149,500 24 22-Oct-26 10,305,000
10 22-Oct-22 305,000 25 15-Apr-27 149,500
11 15-Apr-23 149,500 26 15-Oct-27 149,500
12 8-Sep-23 314,000 27 15-Apr-28 149,500
13 15-Oct-23 149,500 28 15-Oct-28 149,500
14 22-Oct-23 305,000 29 15-Apr-29 149,500
15 15-Apr-24 149,500 30 15-Oct-29 10,149,500
 
1. Indicate the main points that Zheng should emphasize in this presentation 
about the laddered portfolio to senior members of the Wang family.
Solution
Zheng should emphasize three features of the portfolio:
High credit quality . Given that the family already has substantial holdings 
in residential property and equity, which are subject to price volatility 
and risk, investments in government bonds provide the Wang family with 
holdings in a very low-risk asset class.
Liquidity . The schedule of payments shows that coupon payments are 
received each year. These funds can be used for any cash need, including 
household expenses. The large principal payments can be reinvested in 
longer-term government bonds at the back of the ladder.
Yield curve diversification . The bond investments are spread out along 
four segments of the government bond yield curve. If they were concen -
trated at a single point, the portfolio would have the risk of higher yields 
at that point. By spreading out the maturities in the ladder formation, the 
portfolio has the benefit of diversification.
SUMMARY  
 ■Fixed-income investments provide diversification benefits in a portfolio con -
text. These benefits arise from the generally low correlations of fixed-income 
investments with other major asset classes, such as equities.
 ■Floating-rate and inflation-linked bonds can be used to hedge inflation risk.
 ■Fixed-income investments have regular cash flows, which is beneficial for 
the purposes of funding future liabilities.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 90
 ■For liability-based fixed-income mandates, portfolio construction follows 
two main approaches—cash flow matching and duration matching—to 
match fixed-income assets with future liabilities.
 ■Total return mandates are generally structured to either track or outperform 
a benchmark.
 ■Total return mandates can be classified into various approaches according to 
their target active return and active risk levels. Approaches range from pure 
indexing to enhanced indexing to active management.
 ■Bond portfolio duration is the sensitivity of a portfolio of bonds to small 
changes in interest rates. It can be calculated as the weighted average of 
time to receipt of the aggregate cash flows or, more commonly, as the 
weighted average of the individual bond durations that comprise the 
portfolio.
 ■Modified duration of a bond portfolio indicates the percentage change in 
the market value given a change in yield to maturity. Modified duration of a 
portfolio comprising j fixed-income securities can be estimated as
  AvgModDur  =  ∑ j=1  J     ModDur   j   (   MV  j   _ MV  )  ,
where MV stands for market value of the portfolio and MVj is the market 
value of a specific bond in the portfolio.
 ■Convexity of a bond portfolio is a second-order effect; it operates behind 
duration in importance and can largely be ignored for small yield changes. 
When convexity is added with the use of derivatives, however, it can be 
extremely important to returns.
 ■Effective duration and convexity of a portfolio are the relevant summary 
statistics when future cash flows of bonds in a portfolio are contingent on 
interest rate changes.
 ■Spread duration is a useful measure for determining a portfolio’s sensitiv -
ity to changes in credit spreads. It provides the approximate percentage 
increase (decrease) in bond price expected for a 1% decrease (increase) in 
credit spread.
 ■Duration times spread is a modification of the spread duration definition to 
incorporate the empirical observation that spread changes across the credit 
spectrum tend to occur on a proportional percentage  basis rather than being 
based on absolute  basis point changes.
 ■Portfolio dispersion captures the variance of the times to receipt of cash 
flows around the duration. It is used in measuring interest rate immuniza -
tion for liabilities.
 ■Duration management is the primary tool used by fixed-income portfolio 
managers.
 ■Convexity supplements duration as a measure of a bond’s price sensitiv -
ity for larger movements in interest rates. Adjusting convexity can be an 
important portfolio management tool.
 ■For two portfolios with the same duration, the portfolio with higher con -
vexity has higher sensitivity to large declines in yields to maturity and lower 
sensitivity to large increases in yields to maturity.
 ■Interest rate derivatives can be used effectively to increase or decrease dura -
tion and convexity in a bond portfolio.
Laddered Portfolios  91
 ■Liquidity is an important consideration in fixed-income portfolio man -
agement. Bonds are generally less liquid than equities, and liquidity varies 
greatly across sectors.
 ■Liquidity affects pricing in fixed-income markets because many bonds either 
do not trade or trade infrequently.
 ■Liquidity affects portfolio construction because there is a trade-off between 
liquidity and yield to maturity. Less liquid bonds have higher yields to 
maturity, all else being equal, and may be more desirable for buy-and-hold 
investors. Investors anticipating liquidity needs may forego higher yields to 
maturity for more liquid bonds.
 ■Investors can obtain exposure to the bond market using mutual funds and 
ETFs that track a bond index. Shares in mutual funds are redeemable at the 
net asset value with a one-day time lag. ETF shares have the advantage of 
trading on an exchange.
 ■A total return swap, an over-the-counter derivative, allows an institu -
tional investor to transform an asset or liability from one asset category to 
another—for instance, from variable-rate cash flows referencing the market 
reference rate to the total return on a particular bond index.
 ■A total return swap (TRS) can have some advantages over a direct invest -
ment in a bond mutual fund or ETF. As a derivative, it requires less initial 
cash outlay than direct investment in the bond portfolio for similar perfor -
mance but carries counterparty risk.
 ■As a customized over-the-counter product, a TRS can offer exposure to 
assets that are difficult to access directly, such as some high-yield and com -
mercial loan investments.
 ■When evaluating fixed-income investment strategies, it is important to 
consider expected returns and to understand the various components of 
expected returns.
 ■Decomposing expected fixed-income returns allows investors to understand 
the different sources of returns given expected changes in bond market 
conditions.
 ■A model for expected fixed-income returns can decompose them into the 
following components: coupon income, rolldown return, expected change in 
price based on investor’s views of yields to maturity and yield spreads, and 
expected currency gains or losses.
 ■Leverage is the use of borrowed capital to increase the magnitude of port -
folio positions. By using leverage, fixed-income portfolio managers may be 
able to increase portfolio returns relative to what they can achieve in unlev -
eraged portfolios. The potential for increased returns, however, comes with 
increased risk.
 ■Methods for leveraging fixed-income portfolios include the use of futures 
contracts, swap agreements, repurchase agreements, structured financial 
instruments, and security lending.
 ■Taxes can complicate investment decisions in fixed-income portfolio 
management. Complications result from the differences in taxation among 
investor types, countries, and income sources.
 ■The two primary sources of investment income that affect taxes for 
fixed-income securities are coupon payments (interest income) and capi -
tal gains or losses. Tax is usually payable only on capital gains and interest 
income that have actually been received.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 92
 ■Capital gains are frequently taxed at a lower effective tax rate than interest 
income. If capital losses exceed capital gains in the year, they can often be 
“carried forward” and applied to gains in future years.
 ■Structured fixed-income investing requires a frame of reference, such as a 
balance sheet, to structure the bond portfolio. This frame of reference can 
be as simple as the time to retirement for an individual or as complex as a 
balance sheet of rate-sensitive assets and liabilities for a company.
 ■Assets and liabilities can be categorized by the degree of certainty surround -
ing the amount and timing of cash flows. Type I assets and liabilities, such 
as traditional fixed-rate bonds with no embedded options, have known 
amounts and payment dates. For Type I assets and liabilities, such yield 
duration statistics as Macaulay, modified, and money duration apply. 
 ■Type II, III, and IV assets and liabilities have uncertain amounts and/or 
uncertain timing of payment. For Type II, III, and IV assets and liabilities, 
curve duration statistics, such as effective duration, are needed. A model is 
used to obtain the estimated values when the yield curve shifts up and down 
by the same amount.
 ■Structural risk to immunization arises from some non-parallel shifts and 
twists to the yield curve. This risk is reduced by minimizing the dispersion 
of cash flows in the portfolio, which can be accomplished by minimizing the 
convexity statistic for the portfolio.
 ■For multiple liabilities, one method of immunization is cash flow matching. 
A portfolio of high-quality zero-coupon or fixed-income bonds is purchased 
to match as closely as possible the amount and timing of the liabilities.
 ■A motive for cash flow matching can be accounting defeasance, whereby 
both the assets and liabilities are removed from the balance sheet.
 ■A laddered bond portfolio is a common investment strategy in the wealth 
management industry. The laddered portfolio offers “diversification” over 
the yield curve compared with “bullet” or “barbell” portfolios. 
 ■A laddered portfolio offers an increase in convexity because the cash flows 
have greater dispersions than a more concentrated (bullet) portfolio.
 ■A laddered portfolio provides liquidity in that it always contains a 
soon-to-mature bond that could provide high-quality, low-duration collat -
eral on a repo contract if needed.
References 93
REFERENCES
Hanke, B. and G. Seals. 2010. “Fixed-Income Analysis: Yield Curve Construction, Trading 
Strategies, and Risk Analysis. ” CFA Institute online course.
Rogers, D. 2006. Tax-Aware Investment Management: The Essential Guide . New York: 
Bloomberg Press.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 94
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions 
1-6
Cécile is a junior analyst for an international wealth management firm. Her 
supervisor, Margit, asks Cécile to evaluate three fixed-income funds as part of the 
firm’s global fixed-income offerings. Selected financial data for the funds Aschel, 
Permot, and Rosaiso are presented in Exhibit 1 . In Cécile’s initial review, she 
assumes that there is no reinvestment income and that the yield curve remains 
unchanged.
Exhibit 1: Selected Data on Fixed-Income Funds
  Aschel Permot Rosaiso
Current average bond price $117.00 $91.50 $94.60
Expected average bond price in one year (end of 
Year 1)$114.00 $96.00 $97.00
Average modified duration 7.07 7.38 6.99
Average annual coupon payment $3.63 $6.07 $6.36
Present value of portfolio’s assets (millions) $136.33 $68.50 $74.38
Bond type *
Fixed-coupon bonds 95% 38% 62%
Floating-coupon bonds 2% 34% 17%
Inflation-linked bonds 3% 28% 21%
Quality *
AAA 65% 15% 20%
BBB 35% 65% 50%
B 0% 20% 20%
Not rated 0% 0% 10%
Value of portfolio’s equity (millions) $94.33
Value of borrowed funds (millions) $42.00
Borrowing rate 2.80%
Return on invested funds 6.20%
*Bond type and quality are shown as a percentage of the total for each fund.
After further review of the composition of each of the funds, Cécile makes the 
following notes:
Note 1 Aschel is the only fund of the three that uses leverage.
Note 2 Rosaiso is the only fund of the three that holds a significant number 
of bonds with embedded options.
Margit asks Cécile to analyze liability-based mandates for a meeting with Villash 
Foundation. Villash Foundation is a tax-exempt client. Prior to the meeting, 
Practice Problems 95
Cécile identifies what she considers to be two key features of a liability-based 
mandate.
Feature 1 It matches expected liability payments with future projected cash 
inflows.
Feature 2 It can minimize the risk of deficient cash inflows for a company.
Two years later, Margit learns that Villash Foundation needs $5 million in cash 
to meet liabilities. She asks Cécile to analyze two bonds for possible liquidation. 
Selected data on the two bonds are presented in Exhibit 2 .
Exhibit 2: Selected Data for Bonds 1 and 2
Bond 1 Bond 2
Current market value $5,000,000 $5,000,000
Capital gain/loss $400,000 –$400,000
Coupon rate 2.05% 2.05%
Remaining maturity 8 years 8 years
Investment view Overvalued Undervalued
Income tax rate 39% 
30%Capital gains tax rate
1. Based on Exhibit 1 , which fund provides the highest level of protection against 
inflation for coupon payments?
A. Aschel
B. Permot
C. Rosaiso
2. Based on Exhibit 1 , the rolling yield of Aschel over a one-year investment horizon 
is closest  to:
A. 2.56%.
B. 0.54%.
C. 5.66%.
3. The leveraged portfolio return for Aschel is closest  to:
A. 7.25%.
B. 7.71%.
C. 8.96%.
4. Based on Note 2, Rosaiso is the only fund for which the expected change in price 
based on the investor’s views of yields to maturity and yield spreads should be 
calculated using:
A. convexity.
B. modified duration.
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 96
C. effective duration.
5. Is Cécile correct with respect to key features of liability-based mandates?
A. Yes .
B. No, only Feature 1 is correct.
C. No, only Feature 2 is correct.
6. Based on Exhibit 2 , the optimal strategy to meet Villash Foundation’s cash needs 
is the sale of:
A. 100% of Bond 1.
B. 100% of Bond 2.
C. 50% of Bond 1 and 50% of Bond 2.
The following information relates to questions 
7-12
Celia is chief investment officer for the Topanga Investors Fund, which invests in 
equities and fixed income. The clients in the fund are all taxable investors. The 
fixed-income allocation includes a domestic (US) bond portfolio and an external -
ly managed global bond portfolio.
The domestic bond portfolio has a total return mandate, which specifies a 
long-term return objective of 25 basis points (bps) over the benchmark index. 
Relative to the benchmark, small deviations in sector weightings are permitted, 
such risk factors as duration must closely match, and tracking error is expected 
to be less than 50 bps per year. These features are typical of enhanced indexing.
The objectives for the domestic bond portfolio include the ability to fund future 
liabilities, protect interest income from short-term inflation, and minimize the 
correlation with the fund’s equity portfolio. The correlation between the fund’s 
domestic bond portfolio and equity portfolio is currently 0.14. Celia plans to re -
duce the fund’s equity allocation and increase the allocation to the domestic bond 
portfolio. She reviews two possible investment strategies.
Strategy 1 Purchase AAA-rated fixed-coupon corporate bonds with a mod -
ified duration of two years and a correlation coefficient with the 
equity portfolio of –0.15.
Strategy 2 Purchase US government agency floating-coupon bonds with a 
modified duration of one month and a correlation coefficient with 
the equity portfolio of –0.10.
Celia realizes that the fund’s return may decrease if the equity allocation of the 
fund is reduced. Celia decides to liquidate $20 million of US Treasuries that are 
currently owned and to invest the proceeds in the US corporate bond sector. To 
fulfill this strategy, Celia asks Dan, a newly hired analyst for the fund, to recom -
mend specific Treasuries to sell and corporate bonds to purchase.
Dan recommends Treasuries from the existing portfolio that he believes are over -
valued and will generate capital gains. Celia asks Dan why he chose only overval -
ued bonds with capital gains and did not include any bonds with capital losses. 
Practice Problems 97
Dan responds with two statements.
Statement 1 Taxable investors should prioritize selling overvalued bonds and 
always sell them before selling bonds that are viewed as fairly 
valued or undervalued.
Statement 2 Taxable investors should never intentionally realize capital 
losses.
Regarding the purchase of corporate bonds, Dan collects relevant data, which are 
presented in Exhibit 1 .
Exhibit 1: Selected Data on Three US Corporate Bonds
Bond Characteristics Bond 1 Bond 2 Bond 3
Credit quality AA AA A
Issue size ($ millions) 100 75 75
Maturity (years) 5 7 7
Total issuance outstanding ($ millions) 1,000 1,500 1,000
Months since issuance New issue 3 6
Celia and Dan review the total expected 12-month return (assuming no reinvest -
ment income) for the global bond portfolio. Selected financial data are presented 
in Exhibit 2 .
Exhibit 2: Selected Data on Global Bond Portfolio
Notional principal of portfolio (in millions) €200
Average bond coupon payment (per €100 par value) €2.25
Coupon frequency Annual
Investment Horizon 1 year
Current average bond price €98.45
Expected average bond price in one year (assuming an unchanged yield curve) €98.62
Average bond convexity 22
Average bond modified duration 5.19
Expected average benchmark yield-to-maturity change 0.15%
Expected change in credit spread (widening) 0.13%
Expected currency gains (€ appreciation vs. $) 0.65%
Celia contemplates adding a new manager to the global bond portfolio. She 
reviews three proposals and determines that each manager uses the same index 
as its benchmark but pursues a different total return approach, as presented in 
Exhibit 3 .
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 98
Exhibit 3: New Manager Proposals: Fixed-Income Portfolio Characteristics
Sector Weights (%) Manager A Manager B Manager C Index
Government 53.5 52.5 47.8 54.1
Agency/quasi-agency 16.2 16.4 13.4 16.0
Corporate 20.0 22.2 25.1 19.8
MBS 10.3 8.9 13.7 10.1
Risk and Return Characteristics Manager A Manager B Manager C Index
Average maturity (years) 7.63 7.84 8.55 7.56
Modified duration (years) 5.23 5.25 6.16 5.22
Average yield to maturity (%) 1.98 2.08 2.12 1.99
Turnover (%) 207 220 290 205
7. Which approach to its total return mandate is the fund’s domestic bond portfolio 
most likely  to use?
A. Pure indexing
B. Enhanced indexing
C. Active management
8. Strategy 2 is most likely  preferred to Strategy 1 for meeting the objective of:
A. protecting against inflation.
B. funding future liabilities.
C. minimizing the correlation of the fund’s domestic bond portfolio and equity 
portfolio.
9. Are Dan’s statements to Celia that support Dan’s choice of bonds to sell correct?
A. Only Statement 1 is correct.
B. Only Statement 2 is correct.
C. Neither Statement 1 nor Statement 2 is correct.
10. Based on Exhibit 1 , which bond most likely  has the highest liquidity premium?
A. Bond 1
B. Bond 2
C. Bond 3
11. Based on Exhibit 2 , the total expected return of the fund’s global bond portfolio is 
closest  to:
A. 0.90%.
B. 1.66%.
C. 3.76%.
Practice Problems 99
12. Based on Exhibit 3 , which manager is most likely  to have an active management 
total return mandate?
A. Manager A
B. Manager B
C. Manager C
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 100
SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct. Permot has the highest percentage of floating-coupon bonds and 
inflation-linked bonds. Bonds with floating coupons protect interest income from 
inflation because the reference rate should adjust for inflation. Inflation-linked 
bonds protect against inflation by paying a return that is directly linked to an in -
dex of consumer prices and adjusting the principal for inflation. Inflation-linked 
bonds protect both coupon and principal payments against inflation.
The level of inflation protection for coupons equals the percentage of the 
portfolio in floating-coupon bonds plus the percentage of the portfolio in 
inflation-linked bonds:
 Aschel = 2% + 3% = 5%.
 Permot = 34% + 28% = 62%.
 Rosaiso = 17% + 21% = 38%.
Thus, Permot has the highest level of inflation protection, with 62% of its portfo -
lio in floating-coupon and inflation-linked bonds.
2. B is correct. The rolling yield is the sum of the coupon income and the rolldown 
return. Coupon income is the sum of the bond’s annual current yield and interest 
on reinvestment income. Cécile assumes that there is no reinvestment income 
for any of the three funds, and the yield income for Aschel will be calculated as 
follows:
 Coupon income = Annual average coupon payment/Current  bond price
 = $3.63/$117.00
 = 0.0310, or 3.10%.
The rolldown return is equal to the bond’s percentage price change assuming 
an unchanged yield curve over the horizon period. The rolldown return will be 
calculated as follows:
   Rolldown Returns  =    ( Bond price   End−of−horizon period   −  Bond price   Beginning−of−horizon period  )      _________________________________________________      Bond price   Beginning−of−horizon period    
        =    ($114.00  − $117.00 )   _______________  $117.00     
= − 0.0256, or − 2.56 % .   
 Rolling yield = Coupon income + Rolldown  return = 3.10% – 2.56% = 0.54%.
3. B is correct. The return for Aschel is 7.71%, calculated as follows:
   r  P   =    r  l   ×  ( V  E   +  V  B  )  −  V  B   ×  r  B    __________________   V  E     . 
  =  r  l   +    V  B   _  V  E     ( r  l   −  r  B  )  
  = 6.20 %  +   $42.00 million  ___________   $94.33 million   (6.20 %  − 2.80%)  
 = 7.71%.
Solutions 101
4. C is correct. Rosaiso is the only fund that holds bonds with embedded options. 
Effective duration should be used for bonds with embedded options. For bonds 
with embedded options, the duration and convexity measures used to calculate 
the expected change in price based on the investor’s views of yields to matu -
rity and yield spreads are effective duration and effective convexity. For bonds 
without embedded options, convexity and modified duration are used in this 
calculation.
5. A is correct. Liability-based mandates are investments that take an investor’s 
future obligations into consideration. Liability-based mandates are managed 
to match expected liability payments with future projected cash inflows. These 
types of mandates are structured in a way to ensure that a liability or a stream of 
liabilities can be covered and that any risk of shortfalls or deficient cash inflows 
for a company are minimized.
6. A is correct. The optimal strategy for Villash is the sale of 100% of Bond 1, which 
Cécile considers to be overvalued. Because Villash is a tax-exempt foundation, 
tax considerations are not relevant and Cécile’s investment views drive her trad -
ing recommendations.
7. B is correct. The domestic bond portfolio’s return objective is to modestly out -
perform the benchmark. Its risk factors, such as duration, are to closely match 
the benchmark. Small deviations in sector weights are allowed, and tracking 
error should be less than 50 bps per year. These features are typical of enhanced 
indexing.
8. A is correct. Floating-coupon bonds provide inflation protection for the inter -
est income because the reference rate should adjust for inflation. The purchase 
of fixed-coupon bonds as outlined in Strategy 1 provides no protection against 
inflation for either interest or principal. Strategy 1 would instead be superior to 
Strategy 2 in funding future liabilities (better predictability as to the amount of 
cash flows) and reducing the correlation between the fund’s domestic bond port -
folio and equity portfolio (better diversification).
9. C is correct. Since the fund’s clients are taxable investors, there is value in har -
vesting tax losses. These losses can be used to offset capital gains within the fund 
that will otherwise be distributed to the clients and result in higher tax payments, 
which decreases the total value of the investment to clients. The fund has to con -
sider the overall value of the investment to its clients, including taxes, which may 
result in the sale of bonds that are not viewed as overvalued. Tax-exempt inves -
tors’ decisions are driven by their investment views without regard to offsetting 
gains and losses for tax purposes.
10. C is correct. Bond 3 is most likely to be the least liquid of the three bonds pre -
sented in Exhibit 1  and will thus most likely require the highest liquidity premi -
um. Low credit ratings, longer time since issuance, smaller issuance size, smaller 
issuance outstanding, and longer time to maturity typically are associated with 
lower liquidity (and thus a higher liquidity premium). Bond 3 has the lowest 
credit quality and the longest time since issuance of the three bonds. Bond 3 
also has a smaller issue size and a longer time to maturity than Bond 1. The total 
issuance outstanding for Bond 3 is smaller than that of Bond 2 and equal to that 
of Bond 1.
11. B is correct. The total expected return is calculated as follows:
 Total expected return =
 Rolling yield
Learning Module 2 Overview of Fixed-Income Portfolio Management 102
 +/– E(Change in price based on investor’s  benchmark  yield view)
 +/– E(Change in price due to investor’s  view of credit spread)
 +/– E(Currency  gains or losses),
where Rolling yield = Coupon income + Rolldown return. 
Return Component Formula Calculation
Coupon income Annual coupon payment/Current bond 
price€2.25/€;98.45 = 2.29%
+ Rolldown return (Bond priceEnd-of-horizon period  − Bond 
priceBeginning-of-horizon period )/Bond 
priceBeginning-of-horizon period(€98.62 − €98.45)/€98.45 = 0.17%
= Rolling yield Coupon income + Rolldown return 2.29% + 0.17% = 2.46%
+/− E(Change in price based on inves -
tor's benchmark yield view)(−MD × ∆Yield) + [½ × Convexity × 
(∆Yield)2 ](−5.19 × 0.0015) + [½ × 22 × (0.0015)2 ] 
= −0.78%
+/− E(Change in price due to inves -
tor's view of credit spread)(−MD × ∆Spread) + [½ × Convexity × 
(∆Spread)2 ](−5.19 × 0.0013) + [½ × 22 × (0.0013)2 ] 
= −0.67%
+/− E(Currency gains or losses) Given 0.65%
= Total expected return 1.66%
12. C is correct. The sector weights, risk and return characteristics, and turnover for 
Manager C differ significantly from those of the index, which is typical of an ac -
tive management mandate. In particular, Manager C’s modified duration of 6.16 
represents a much larger deviation from the benchmark index modified duration 
of 5.22 than that of the other managers, which is a characteristic unique to an 
active management mandate.
Asset Allocation to Alternative 
Investments
by Adam Kobor, PhD, CFA, and Mark D. Guinney, CFA.
Adam Kobor, PhD, CFA, is at New York University (USA). Mark D. Guinney, CFA (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
explain the roles that alternative investments play in multi-asset 
portfolios
compare alternative investments and bonds as risk mitigators in 
relation to a long equity position
compare traditional and risk-based approaches to defining the 
investment opportunity set, including alternative investments
discuss investment considerations that are important in allocating to 
different types of alternative investments
discuss suitability considerations in allocating to alternative 
investments
discuss approaches to asset allocation to alternative investments
discuss the importance of liquidity planning in allocating to 
alternative investments
discuss considerations in monitoring alternative investment 
programs
INTRODUCTION
explain the roles that alternative investments play in multi-asset 
portfolios
Asset allocation is a critical decision in the investment process. The mathematical 
and analytical processes inherent in contemporary asset allocation techniques are 
complicated by the idiosyncrasies of alternative investments. Approaches to incorpo -
rating alternative assets into the strategic asset allocation have developed rapidly as 
allocations to assets other than stocks and bonds have accelerated in the aftermath of 1LEARNING MODULE
3
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 104
the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. The term “alternative” understates the prominence of 
alternative investment allocations in many investment programs, because institutional 
and private clients have been increasingly turning to these investments not just to 
supplement traditional long-only stocks and bonds but also sometimes to replace them 
altogether. For example, the Yale Endowment and the Canada Pension Plan Investment 
Board both have close to 50% of their assets allocated to alternatives.1 Although these 
two funds are admittedly outliers, between 2008 and 2017 most of the pension funds 
around the world substantially expanded their allocations to alternative asset classes. 
On average, pension funds in developed markets increased their allocation from 7.2% 
to 11.8% of assets under management (AUM) in 2017, a 63% increase.2
“ Alternative” investment has no universally accepted definition. For the purposes 
of this reading, alternative investments include private equity, hedge funds, real assets 
(including energy and commodity investments), commercial real estate, and private 
credit.
The reading begins with a discussion of the role alternative assets play in a 
multi-asset portfolio and explores how alternatives may serve to mitigate long-only 
equity risk, a role traditionally held by bonds. We then consider different ways inves -
tors may define the opportunity set—through the traditional asset class lens or, more 
recently, using a risk- or factor-based lens. An allocation to alternatives is not for all 
investors, so the reading describes issues that should be addressed when considering 
an allocation to alternatives. We then discuss approaches to asset allocation when 
incorporating alternatives in the opportunity set and the need for liquidity planning 
in private investment alternatives. Finally, the reading discusses the unique monitoring 
requirements for an alternatives portfolio.
The Role of Alternative Investments in a Multi-Asset Portfolio
Allocations to alternatives are playing an increasing role in investor portfolios largely 
driven by the belief that these investments increase the risk-adjusted return expecta -
tions for their programs. Some allocations are driven by expectations of higher returns, 
while others are driven by the expected diversification (risk-reduction) benefits. In the 
aggregate, the portfolio’s risk-adjusted  return is expected to improve. Exhibit 1  provides 
a framework for how the common alternative strategies are generally perceived to 
affect the risk/return profile of a “typical” 60/40 portfolio of public stocks and bonds.
Exhibit 1: Alternative Investments in the Risk/Reward Continuum
Hedge Funds
Real Assets Private Cr edit
Private Real Assets
Risk Reducing Return EnhancingPrivate Equity
1 Boston Consulting Group (BCG), “The Rise of Alternative Assets and Long-Term Investing (March 2017).
2 See Ivashina and Lerner 2018 .
Introduction 105
Although we present a simplified view, real assets are generally believed to mitigate 
the risks to the portfolio arising from unexpected inflation. At the other end of the 
spectrum, venture capital investments (private equity) are expected to provide a suffi -
cient return premium over public equities to compensate for their illiquidity risk and 
heightened operational complexity. Hedge funds, the least homogenous of strategies, 
span the spectrum from “risk reducing” or diversifying (many arbitrage strategies) 
to “return enhancing” (e.g., an activist fund that takes significant positions in public 
companies with the goal of improving performance through management changes, 
capital allocation policies, and/or company strategy).
Risk reduction can mean different things to different investors. Institutions may 
choose to add non-correlated strategies to their portfolios to reduce the volatility of 
the overall investment program. Private clients are frequently concerned with reducing 
only downside volatility—the “left tail” risk associated with significant public equity 
market drawdowns. An insurance pool whose liabilities are sensitive to inflation 
might benefit from real assets that could reduce its asset–liability mismatch. Exhibit 2  
provides some guidance as to how an allocator might view alternative assets vis-à-vis 
traditional asset classes.
Exhibit 2: Illustrative Capital Market Assumptions
  Traditional Assets   Alternative Assets
 Public 
Equities CashGovt  
BondsBroad 
Fixed 
Income 
Private 
CreditHedge 
Funds CommoditiesPublic 
Real 
EstatePrivate 
Real 
EstatePrivate 
Equity
Expected 
Return 
(Geometric 
Average)6.5% 2.0% 2.3% 2.8%   6.5% 5.0% 4.5% 6.0% 5.5% 8.5%
Volatility 17.0% 1.1% 4.9% 3.4%  10.0% 8.1% 25.2% 20.4% 13.8% 15.7%
Correlation 
with 
Equities1.00 –0.12 –0.60 –0.41   0.70 0.83 0.21 0.60 0.37 0.81
Equity Beta 1.00 –0.01 –0.17 –0.08   0.40 0.40 0.31 0.72 0.30 0.74
Source:  Authors’ own data.
In the context of asset allocation, investors may categorize an asset class based on the 
role it is expected to play in the overall portfolio. The roles and their relative importance 
will vary among investors, but it is common to identify the following functional roles:
 ■Capital growth : This role may be a top priority for portfolios with a long-
term time horizon and relatively high-return target. Usually, public and 
private equity investments would be the most obvious choices for this role.
 ■Income generation : Certain asset classes, like fixed income or real estate, are 
capable of generating reasonably steady cash flow stream for investors.
 ■Risk diversification : In the case of an equity-oriented portfolio, investors 
may seek assets that diversify the dominant equity risk. Real assets and 
several hedge fund strategies may fit here. Similarly, fixed-income investors 
may be interested in diversifying pure yield curve risk via private credit.
 ■Safety : Certain asset classes may play the role of safe haven when most of 
the risky asset classes suffer. Government bonds or gold may potentially play 
such roles in a well-diversified portfolio.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 106
Exhibit 3  illustrates how each of the alternative assets is generally perceived to 
fulfill these functional roles.
Exhibit 3: The Role of Asset Classes in a Multi-Asset Portfolio
 
Role
Asset Clas sCapital  
Gro wth IncomeDiversifying 
Public  
Equities Safety
Fixed Income  
and CreditGovernment sM HH
 Link ed MH H/M
Inv.-Grade Credit MH M
High - Yield Credit HM
Private Credit HM
Equities Public Equit yH M
Private Equity HM M
Real Esta te Public Real Esta te MH M
Private Real Esta te MH M
Real Assets Public Real Assets 
(Energ y, Metal,  
etc.)H
Private Real  
Assets (Timber, 
etc.)HH H
Hedge FundsA bsolut e Return MH
Equity Long/Shor tM
Notes : H = high/strong potential to fulfill the indicated role; M = moderate potential to fulfill the 
indicated role.
Exhibit 4  illustrates the potential contributions the various alternative strategies might 
make to a portfolio dominated by equity risk. Note that the graph illustrates the aver -
age investment characteristics of each asset class over some extended period of time. 
Some assets—gold, for example—may not consistently exhibit attractive aggregate  
characteristics compared to other strategies but may serve the portfolio well during 
many major market shocks.
Introduction 107
Exhibit 4: Diversification Potential of Various Alternative Asset Classes
More Diversifying-Less Diversifying
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
0 30 10 5 15 25 20
Less V olatile More VolatileEvent Driven
Relative V alue
Equity Market Neutral
BondsGlobal Macr oDistr essed
GoldEquity Long/Short
Private Real EstateUS REIT
CommoditiesStocks
Sources:  Bloomberg and authors’ own data and calculations.
The Role of Private Equity in a Multi-Asset Portfolio
Private equity investments are generally viewed as a return enhancer in a portfolio of 
traditional assets. The expectation for a return premium over public equities stems from 
the illiquidity risk that comes with most forms of private equity investment. Because 
of the strong link between the fundamentals of private and public companies, there 
are limited diversification benefits when added to a portfolio that otherwise contains 
significant public equity exposure. Private equity volatility is not directly observable 
because holdings are not publicly traded. Assets tend to be valued at the lower of 
cost or the value at which the company raises additional capital or when ownership 
changes hands (e.g., through an initial public offering or a sale to a strategic buyer 
or to another private equity sponsor). Consequently, private equity indexes do not 
provide a true picture of the strategy’s risk. For asset allocation exercises, volatility is 
often estimated using a public equity proxy with an adjustment to better represent 
the nature of the private equity program. For example, a proxy for early stage venture 
capital might be microcap technology companies. A proxy for buyout funds might 
start with the volatility of a geographically relevant large-cap equity index (e.g., S&P 
500, Nikkei), which is then adjusted for relative financial leverage.
The Role of Hedge Funds in a Multi-Asset Portfolio
As illustrated in Exhibit 1 , hedge funds span the spectrum from being risk reducers 
to return enhancers. Generally speaking, long/short equity strategies are believed 
to deliver equity-like returns with less than full exposure to the equity premium but 
with an additional source of return that might come from the manager’s shorting of 
individual stocks. Short-biased equity strategies are expected to lower a portfolio’s 
overall equity beta while producing some measure of alpha. Arbitrage and event-driven 
strategies, executed properly, look to exploit small inefficiencies in the public markets 
while exhibiting low to no correlation with traditional asset classes. However, most 
hedge fund arbitrage strategies involve some degree of “short volatility” risk. Because of 
this “short volatility” risk, the volatility in an arbitrage strategy is non-symmetrical; the 
aggregate volatility may look muted if the period from which the data are drawn does 
not include a market stress period. “Opportunistic” strategies (e.g., global macro and 
managed futures), although very volatile as stand-alone strategies, provide exposures 
not otherwise readily accessible in traditional stock and bond strategies.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 108
The Role of Real Assets in a Multi-Asset Portfolio
This category includes timber, commodities, farmland, energy, and infrastructure 
assets. The common thread for these investments is that the underlying investment 
is a physical asset with a relatively high degree of correlation with inflation broadly or 
with a sub-component of inflation, such as oil (energy funds), agricultural products 
(farmland), or pulp and wood products (timber).
Timber investments  provide both growth and inflation-hedging properties in 
a multi-asset portfolio. Growth is provided through the biological growth of the 
tree itself as well as through the appreciation in the underlying land value. Timber’s 
inflation-hedging characteristics are derived from the unique nature in which the value 
of the asset is realized: If the market for timber products is weak, the owner of the 
asset can leave it “on the stump” waiting for prices to rise. While waiting, the volume 
of the asset increases—the tree continues to grow—and there is ultimately more of 
the asset to sell when prices recover. At the same time, the volatility of the timber 
asset rises; the market for more mature timber is more volatile, and the potential loss 
from pests and natural disasters rises.
Commodities investments  (i.e., tradable commodities) fall into the following four 
categories:
 ■Metals (gold, silver, platinum, copper)
 ■Energy (crude oil, natural gas, heating oil, gasoline)
 ■Livestock and Meat (hogs, pork bellies, live cattle)
 ■Agricultural (corn, soybeans, wheat, rice, cocoa, coffee, cotton, sugar)
Although it is possible to own the commodity asset directly (e.g., corn, wheat, barrel 
of oil), most investors will invest in commodity derivatives (i.e., futures contracts) whose 
price is directly related to the price of the physical commodity. Investors generally own 
commodities as a hedge against a core constituent of inflation measures as well as a 
differentiated source of alpha. Gold and other precious metals are frequently owned 
directly because they are thought to be a good store of value in the face of a depreci -
ating currency. Storage and insurance costs come with owning commodities directly.
Farmland investing  involves two primary approaches. The higher return/risk 
strategy involves owning the farmland while providing the farmer a salary for tend -
ing and selling the crops. The investor retains the commodity risk and the execution 
risk.  This approach requires a long time horizon and has high sensitivity to natural 
disasters and regulatory risk, such as trade disputes. In the other main approach, the 
investor owns the farmland but leases the property to the farmer. The farmer retains 
the risk for execution and commodity prices. If an investor pursues this second 
strategy, farmland is more like core commercial real estate investing than a real asset 
(commodity) strategy.
Energy investments  consist of strategies that focus on the exploration, development, 
transportation, and delivery of energy (primarily oil and natural gas-based energy 
sources but also increasingly wind, hydroelectric, and solar) as well as all the ancil -
lary services that facilitate energy production. Investors usually do not own the land 
that holds the minerals. Most energy investments are executed through call-down, 
private equity-style funds and are usually long-dated, illiquid holdings. Energy assets 
are generally considered real assets because the investor owns the mineral rights to 
certain commodities (e.g., natural gas, oil, methane) that can be correlated with certain 
inflationary factors. Master limited partnerships (MLPs) are another frequently used 
vehicle for energy investments. MLPs generally construct and own the pipelines that 
carry oil or natural gas from the wellhead to the storage facility. MLPs rarely take 
ownership of the energy assets. The companies charge a fee based on the volume of 
oil/natural gas they transport. This fee is often pegged to the Producer Price Index.
Introduction 109
Infrastructure  is a strategy that typically involves the construction and maintenance 
of public-use projects, such as building bridges, toll roads, or airports. Because of the 
illiquid nature of these assets, the holding period associated with these funds can be 
even longer than the typical illiquid strategy, with some lasting 20 years or longer. 
These assets tend to generate stable or modestly growing income, and the asset itself 
often requires minimal upkeep or capital expenditures once built. The revenue gen -
erated by the assets tends to have high correlation with overall inflation, though it is 
often subject to regulatory risks because governmental agencies may be involved in 
price setting with certain jurisdictions and assets.
The Role of Commercial Real Estate in a Multi-Asset Portfolio
Real estate investing involves the development, acquisition, management, and dispo -
sition of commercial properties, including retail, office, industrial, housing (including 
apartments), and hotels. Strategies range from core,  the ownership of fully occupied 
properties and collecting rents, to opportunistic,  ground-up property development 
(land acquisition, construction, and sale) and/or the purchase of distressed assets with 
the intent to rehabilitate them.
Real estate investments are believed to provide protection against unanticipated 
increases in inflation. Two fundamental attributes of real estate investment contribute 
to this inflation protection. Well-positioned properties frequently have the ability 
to increase rents in response to inflationary pressures, and the value of the physical 
buildings may increase with inflation (properties are often valued as a function of 
replacement cost). In this way, real estate contributes both income and capital gain 
potential to a portfolio. Building a diversified private commercial real estate program 
can be challenging for all but the largest and most sophisticated allocators. The pub -
lic real estate market is a fraction of the size of the private real estate market, but 
it may be easier and cheaper to build a diversified real estate investment program 
in some geographies (e.g., United States, Europe) via the public markets. However, 
private real estate can offer exposures that are difficult if not impossible to achieve 
through publicly-traded real estate securities. Investing directly (or in a private fund) 
offers customization by geography, property type, and strategy (e.g., distressed, core, 
development).
The Role of Private Credit in a Multi-Asset Portfolio
Private credit includes distressed investment and direct lending. Although both strate -
gies involve the ownership of fixed-income assets, their roles in an investment program 
are quite different. Direct-lending assets are income-producing, and the asset owner 
assumes any default or recovery risks. Direct-lending assets generally behave like their 
public market counterparts with similar credit profiles (i.e., high-quality, direct-lending 
assets behave like investment-grade bonds, and low-quality, direct-lending assets 
behave like high-yield bonds). Distressed debt assets have a more equity-like profile. 
The expected return is derived from the value of a company’s assets relative to its 
debt. Illiquidity risks are high with both strategies. Direct-lending assets have no 
secondary market.
Direct-lending funds provide capital to individuals and small businesses that 
generally cannot access more traditional lending channels. Some loans are unsecured 
while others might be backed by an asset, such as a house or car. Direct lending is one 
of the least liquid debt strategies because there is typically no secondary market for 
these instruments. Investors in direct-lending strategies gain access to a high-yielding 
but riskier segment of the debt market that is not available via the traditional public 
markets.
Distressed funds typically purchase the securities of an entity that is under stress and 
where the stress is relieved through legal restructuring or bankruptcy. The investment 
can take the form of debt or equity, and in many strategies, the manager often takes 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 110
an active role throughout the restructuring or bankruptcy. Because many investors 
are precluded from owning companies or entities that are in bankruptcy or default, 
managers of distressed funds are often able to purchase assets (usually the debt) at 
a significant discount. Experience with the bankruptcy process frequently distin -
guishes these managers from others. Although the asset is usually a bond, distressed 
investments typically have low sensitivity to traditional bond risks (i.e., interest rate 
changes or changes in spreads) because the idiosyncratic risk of the company itself 
dominates all other risks.
DIVERSIFYING EQUITY RISK
compare alternative investments and bonds as risk mitigators in 
relation to a long equity position
In this section, we examine the claim that alternative assets may be better risk mit -
igators than government bonds. To address this question, we must agree on which  
risks alternatives are said to mitigate and on what  time horizon is relevant. If your 
investment horizon is short term, volatility may be the most important risk measure. 
If you are a long-term investor, not achieving the long-horizon return objective may 
be the most relevant concern.
Volatility Reduction over the Short Time Horizon
Let’s look first at the short horizon investor and consider how alternative asset classes 
compare to bonds as a volatility reducer in an equity-dominated portfolio. Advocates 
of alternative investments as risk reducers sometimes argue that alternative invest -
ments’ volatilities calculated based on reported returns are significantly lower than 
the volatility of public equities. An immediate technical challenge is that reported 
returns of many alternative asset classes need an adjustment called unsmoothing  
for proper risk estimation. (Various approaches have been developed to unsmooth a 
return series that demonstrates serial correlation. The specifics of those approaches 
are beyond the scope of this reading.) In the case of private investments, reported 
returns are calculated from appraisal-based valuations that may result in volatility and 
correlation estimates that are too low. (The underlying assumptions in most appraisal 
models tend to lead to gradual and incremental changes in appraised value that may 
not accurately capture the asset’s true price realized in an actual transaction. The low 
volatility of the return stream may also dampen the reported correlation between the 
appraisal-based asset and the more volatile market-based asset.) Other factors may 
also contribute to underestimated risk across alternatives. For example, survivorship 
bias  and back-fill bias  (reporting returns to a database only after they are known to 
be good returns) in hedge fund databases can potentially lead to an understatement 
of downside risk. Additionally, a hedge fund “index” includes many managers whose 
returns exhibit low correlation; in the same way that combining stocks and bonds in 
a portfolio can be expected to lower overall portfolio volatility, so too does combining 
several hedge funds into an “index. ”
As an example, we build a hypothetical, equally-weighted index of long/short 
equity hedge funds with volatilities ranging from 6% to 11%. As shown in Exhibit 5 , 
given the less-than-perfect correlation among the constituents of our index, the index 
volatility is only 4.9%:2
Diversifying Equity Risk 111
Exhibit 5: Volatility Is Less Than the Sum of Its Parts
  Fund 1 Fund 2 Fund 3 Fund 4 Fund 5 Combined
Volatility 10.9% 6.5% 8.5% 9.7% 8.1% 4.9%
Correlation          
Fund 1   –0.02 0.14 0.00 0.15
Fund 2     0.27 0.39 0.29
Fund 3       0.25 –0.03
Fund 4         0.14
Exhibit 6  shows the correlations of fixed-income and alternative asset classes to public 
equities based on observed market data over 1997–2017. We also show each asset 
class’s estimated equity beta. To estimate correlations and betas, we used unsmoothed 
return data for alternative asset classes. We discuss unsmoothing of returns in more 
detail in a later section.
Exhibit 6: Fixed-Income’s and Alternative’s Equity Beta and Correlation with 
Equities
Corr elation with Equities Equity BetaCorr elation
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
Broad Fixed IncomeGovernments
Hedge Funds
Commodities
Public Real Estate
Private Real Estate
Private Equity
Sources : Bloomberg and authors’ own data and calculations.
Most of the alternative investment categories had positive, but less than perfect, correla -
tion with equities. Although certain alternatives (e.g., commodities, particularly gold) 
may rally during a public equity market downturn, other alternative investments—like 
hedge funds, private credit, or private equities—also experience drawdowns at the 
same time the equity market falls. Hedge funds and private equities have a correlation 
co-efficient with equities over +0.8, and this indicates a fairly strong positive relation -
ship between public equities and these alternative investments.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 112
Government bonds, however, have a −0.6 estimated correlation with equities, 
which indicates a negative relationship of moderate strength. This is consistent with 
the tendency for government bonds to serve as a risk haven during “risk-off” or “flight 
to quality” episodes.
Although correlation and beta have the same sign and are statistically interrelated, 
we have to remember that they quantify two different things. The correlation coefficient 
quantifies the strength of a linear relationship between two variables, thus playing 
a crucial role in portfolio diversification: The lower the correlation, the stronger the 
asset’s diversification power. Beta, however, measures the response of an asset to 
a unit change in a reference index; for example, equity beta measures how various 
assets would respond to a 1% rise of public equities. Hedge funds’ beta is estimated 
at around 0.4; thus, we would expect a 0.4% return (excluding manager alpha) from 
hedge funds if equities rose by 1%. Hedge funds’ relatively low beta (0.4) and high 
correlation (+0.8) means that hedge funds’ rise or fall is milder than those of public 
equities in magnitude, but this directional relationship is fairly strong in a statistical 
sense. Commodities also have an equity beta of similar positive magnitude (0.3), but 
their correlation with equities is much weaker (+0.2); so, we can expect that a much 
bigger portion of commodity price changes would be driven by factors unrelated to 
the equity markets.
In Exhibit 7 , we compare the total return volatility of public equities (black bar) with 
volatilities of portfolios comprised of 70% equity and 30% other asset classes. Using 
20 years of data, the volatility of public equities is estimated at approximately 17%. A 
portfolio allocated 70% to equity and 30% to cash would imply a portfolio volatility 
of 11.9% (70% × 17%). Portfolios of 70% equities and 30% any of the alternative asset 
classes also reduces portfolio volatility relative to an all-equity portfolio, but the lowest 
volatility of 11.1% could be achieved by combining equities with government bonds 
because of the negative correlation between these two asset classes.
Exhibit 7: Volatility of Portfolios Comprised of 70% Equities and 30% Other 
Asset Class
Cash
GovernmentsEquities
Hedge FundsBroad Fixed Income
Commodities
Public Real Estate
Private Real Estate
Private EquityVolatility
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
Sources : Bloomberg and authors’ own data and calculations.
Diversifying Equity Risk 113
Bear in mind, however, that this analysis is based on 20 years of returns ending in 
2017, a period that was characterized by a persistent negative equity–bond correlation. 
Because there was limited inflation in developed markets over this period, economic 
growth prospects were the dominant influence on asset prices. Positive growth sur -
prises are good for equities (better earnings outlook) and negative for bonds (potential 
central bank rate increases). If inflation becomes a threat, bonds’ risk mitigation power 
could erode. Exhibit 8  looks at the US equity–bond correlation since the 1950s. As 
the chart suggests, the correlation between US equities and government bonds was, 
in fact, positive in the 1970s through the 1990s when inflation was also more elevated.
Exhibit 8: Long-Term Historical Equity–Bond Correlation and Inflation
10-Y ear Rolling US 
Equity-Government 
Bond Corr elation
Inflation (10-year moving average)Corr elation
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1
0
–0.2
–0.30.3
–0.1
–0.4US Inflation
10
9
8
7
5
4
3
16
2
0
Aug/58 Dec/79 Apr/69 Aug/90 Apr/01 Dec/1 1
Sources : Bloomberg and the authors’ own data and calculations.
Risk of Not Meeting the Investment Goals over the Long Time 
Horizon
Volatility is not always the most relevant risk measure. An endowment portfolio is often 
focused on generating a total return equal to at least the spending rate, say 5%, plus 
inflation to preserve real value of capital over a long time horizon. When bond yields 
are very low, the likelihood of meeting the investment objective would be reduced 
given a heavy allocation to bonds, simply because the portfolio’s value would likely 
grow more slowly than the rate implied by the spending rate and inflation. Exhibit 9  
illustrates this point: We show the probability of achieving a 5% real (7.1% nominal3) 
return over various horizons up to 10-years for three 70% equity/30% other asset 
class portfolios. We used quarterly rebalancing. Although allocating the 30% “other” 
to government bonds would lead to the greatest reduction in portfolio volatility, 
government bonds also have lower expected return compared to hedge funds and 
private equity (see Exhibit 2 ).
3 By using the Fisher equation to combine the 5% real return and 2% inflation: (1 + 5%) * (1 + 2%) –1 = 7.1%.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 114
Exhibit 9: The Probability of Achieving Investment Objectives over the 
Longer Time Horizon
Probability
55
50
45
40
35
30
0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5 6.5 7.5 8.5 9.5
Years Ahead30% Government Bonds30% Hedge Funds30% Private Equity
Note : Portfolios comprised of 70% equities and 30% other asset classes.
Source : Authors’ calculations.
The 70% public equities/30% government bond portfolio has an expected return of 
5.7%4, below the nominal return target of 7.1%. The 70% public equities/30% private 
equities portfolio has an expected geometric return of 7.2%, slightly over the return 
target. Both portfolios’ expected returns are 50th percentile returns; there is a 50% 
probability that this is the return that would be realized over time. Thus, the 70% public 
equities/30% private equities portfolio, with a nominal expected return of 7.2%, has 
slightly better than a 50% probability of meeting the 7.1% nominal return target. The 
70% public equities/30% government bond portfolio, with an expected return less 
than the nominal return target, therefore has less than a 50% probability of meeting 
the required return. Why does the 70% public equities/30% private equities portfolio 
maintain its 50%+ probability of meeting the return target over time while the prob -
ability that the 70% public equities/30% government bond portfolio meets the return 
target declines over time? As the time horizon lengthens, return accumulation (com -
pounding) becomes more and more important. In a simplified way, return accumulates 
proportionally with time, whereas volatility scales with the square root of time. Thus, 
as we lengthen the time horizon, the gap between the cumulative return target and 
the expected return accumulation widens faster than the range of possible portfolio 
return outcomes. As a result, the likelihood of a low-returning portfolio catching up 
to the target return declines over time.
To summarize, bonds have been a more effective volatility mitigator than alter -
natives over shorter time horizons, but over long horizons, a heavy allocation to 
bonds would reduce the probability of achieving the investment goal. It is important 
to emphasize that volatility and the probability of achieving the target return are two 
very different dimensions of risk. Volatility addresses interim fluctuations in portfo -
lio return, whereas achieving a return target takes on increasing importance as we 
expand the time horizon over multiple years. Both risks are important, especially for 
4 Note that geometric expected return is approximated as the expected arithmetic return minus half of 
the investment’s variance. Thus, portfolio expected geometric return is not simply the weighted average 
of the asset classes’ expected geometric returns because portfolio variance benefits from diversification.
Diversifying Equity Risk 115
a program that is distributing 7% of assets per year as in this example. Although the 
30% allocation to private equity increases the chance of meeting the expected return, 
a severe and sustained short-term drawdown in the public equity markets could sig -
nificantly handicap the fund’s ability to achieve its long-term return objectives. This 
is why drawdowns (related to volatility) need to be considered and managed.
EXAMPLE 1
Mitigating Equity Risk by Allocating to Hedge Funds or 
Bonds
The investment committee of a major foundation is concerned about high equity 
valuations and would like to increase the allocation either to hedge funds or to 
high-grade, fixed-income assets to diversify equity risk. As the risk manager of 
this foundation:
1. Discuss the justifications and the limitations of using bonds to mitigate 
equity risk.
Solution:
 ■Supporting argument: Bonds have exhibited negative correlation and 
beta to equities in a low inflation environment, so as long as inflation 
stays at or below average historical levels, this negative equity–bond 
correlation should lead to the highest reduction in portfolio volatility.
 ■Limitations: The negative stock/bond correlation may be temporary, 
and amid high inflation the stock/bond correlation could turn positive. 
Furthermore, if bonds’ expected return is low, a heavy allocation to 
bonds may reduce the probability of achieving the foundation’s long-
term return objectives.
2. Discuss the justifications and the limitations of using hedge funds to miti -
gate equity risk.
Solution:
 ■Supporting argument: With an equity beta of around 0.4 (see Exhibit 
2), hedge funds would reduce an equity-dominated portfolio’s overall 
beta. With higher expected returns than bonds, an allocation to hedge 
funds would make achieving the long-term return target more feasible.
 ■Limitations: Although a well-constructed hedge fund portfolio may 
reduce portfolio volatility and beta, hedge funds are often highly 
actively managed, levered investment strategies, and individual hedge 
funds may suffer significant and permanent losses during turbulent 
times.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 116
TRADITIONAL APPROACHES TO ASSET 
CLASSIFICATION
compare traditional and risk-based approaches to defining the 
investment opportunity set, including alternative investments
In this section, we consider how traditional approaches to asset allocation can be 
adapted to include alternative investments and how investors can apply risk-based 
approaches to incorporate alternatives in their asset allocation. This reading extends 
the asset allocation framework introduced in earlier readings on asset allocation. 
Although the ultimate goal of meeting the investment objectives subject to the relevant 
constraints remains the same, investors often face several analytical and operational 
challenges when introducing alternative asset classes.
Traditional Approaches to Asset Classification
When defining asset classes for the traditional approaches to asset allocation, investors 
may group and classify alternative assets along several dimensions. Two common 
approaches (in addition to the growth–income–diversification–safety roles described 
earlier) are with respect to the liquidity of the asset class and with respect to asset 
behavior under various economic conditions.
A Liquidity-Based Approach to Defining the Opportunity Set
Certain alternative investments, like REITs or commodity futures, are highly liquid 
and can be easily traded in public markets. Private investments, however, are highly 
illiquid and usually require long-term commitments (more than 10 years) from the 
investors. Of course, there are differences among various private asset classes in this 
respect as well: Private equity investments may require longer than a 10-year commit -
ment, while the term of a private credit fund can be shorter, say 5 to 8 years. Although 
public equity and private equity may be similar asset classes from the fundamental 
economic point of view, they differ significantly in their liquidity characteristics.
The long investment horizon and the lack of liquidity in many of the alternative 
asset classes make it difficult to accurately characterize their risk characteristics for 
purposes of the asset allocation exercise. One approach to dealing with this issue is 
to make the initial asset allocation decision using only the broad, liquid asset classes 
in which the underlying data that drive risk, return, and correlation assumptions are 
robust (e.g., stocks, bonds, and real estate). A second iteration of the asset allocation 
exercise would break the equity/fixed-income/real estate asset allocation down fur -
ther by using the asset groupings as shown in Exhibit 10 , which illustrates a possible 
categorization of asset classes that incorporates their broad liquidity profile.3
Traditional Approaches to Asset Classification 117
Exhibit 10: Major Asset Class Categories
  Equity &  
Equity-LikeFixed Income & 
Fixed Income-Like Real Estate
Marketable/Liquid Public Equity  
Long/Short Equity 
Hedge FundsFixed Income  
CashPublic Real Estate  
Commodities
Private/Illiquid Private Equity Private Credit Private Real Estate  
Private Real Assets
An Approach Based on Expected Performance under Distinct Macroeconomic Regimes
Investors may also categorize asset classes based on how they are expected to behave 
under different macroeconomic environments, and investors may assign roles to them 
in a broad macroeconomic context:
 ■Capital growth assets  would be expected to benefit from healthy economic 
growth. Public and private equities would belong to this category.
 ■Inflation-hedging assets —so-called “real assets” such as real estate, com -
modities, and natural resources but also inflation-linked bonds—would be 
expected to outperform other asset classes when inflation expectations rise 
or actual inflation exceeds expectations.
 ■Deflation-hedging assets  (e.g., nominal government bonds) would be 
expected to outperform most of the other asset classes when the economy 
slows and inflation becomes very low or negative.
In Exhibit 11 , we illustrate how investors may think about the expected perfor -
mance of various asset classes in a broad macroeconomic context. Each asset class is 
positioned along the continuum to illustrate the macroeconomic environment in which 
we would expect it to generate strong performance. Such mapping is usually based 
on both historical experience and qualitative judgment. Considering the fundamental 
economic drivers of asset classes could help investors construct portfolios that are 
better diversified and more robust under various economic conditions and scenarios.
Exhibit 11: Asset Classes Grouped by the Macroeconomic Environment 
under Which They Would Be Expected to Generate Strong Performance
  Inflation Environment
DeflationModerate 
Inflation High Inflation
Economic 
EnvironmentHigh 
Growth  Public Equity  
Private Equity  
High-Yield Bonds  
Private CreditReal Estate  
Commodities
Low 
Growth/
RecessionGovernment 
Bonds  Inflation-Linked 
Bonds  
Gold
Source:  Authors’ data.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 118
Exhibit 12  illustrates the average quarterly total return of various asset classes and 
alternative strategies under stronger and weaker economic growth environments 
between 1997 and 2017, a period of low to moderate inflation in developed markets.
Exhibit 12: Historical Asset Class Performance under Stronger and Weaker 
Economic Growth Periods (1997–2017)
Average Quarterly Return (%)
Public Equities Fixed Income Hedge Funds Real
EstateReal
AssetsPrivate
Equity
and VC10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
Broad Fixed IncomeUS Equities
Government Bonds
Inflation-Linked BondsHigh-Y ield Cr editNon US Dev Equities
Emer ging Market Equities
Hedge Funds
Commodities
Farmland
Buyout and Gr owth Eq.Public Real EstateHF Distr essed
Private Real EstateHF Equity HedgedHF Macr o
HF Equity Mkt. Neut.
Ventur e Capital
Stronger Economic Gr owth Weaker Economic Gr owth
Notes : Strong and weak economic periods were determined using quarterly GDP data. Strong 
growth periods were those quarters when GDP growth exceeded the average GDP growth through 
the full historical sample.
Sources : The exhibit is based on the authors’ calculations. Index data is based on the following. 
US Equities: Russell 3000; Non-US Developed Market Equities: MSCI EAFE USD Net unhedged; 
Emerging Market Equities: MSCI Emerging Markets Net USD unhedged; Governments: Bloomberg 
Barclays US Treasury Index; Broad Fixed Income: Bloomberg Barclays US Aggregate; High Yield: 
Bloomberg Barclays US Corporate High Yield; Inflation-Linked Bonds: Bloomberg Barclays US 
Government Inflation-Linked Bonds Index; Hedge Funds: HFRI; Public Real Estate: Dow Jones Equity 
REIT Index; Private Real Estate: NCREIF Property Index; Commodities: S&P GSCI Total Return 
Index; Farmland: NCREIF Farmland Index; Buyout and Growth Equities: Cambridge Associates US 
Private Equity Index; Venture Capital: Cambridge Associates US Venture Capital Index.
Public and private equities, hedge funds, and commodities posted strong returns 
amid strong economic growth conditions and weaker returns amid weaker economic 
conditions. Commodities exhibit a bigger disparity between returns in periods of 
stronger and weaker growth than does the hedge fund category.
Within fixed income, government bonds posted higher returns during periods 
of weaker economic growth—when investors likely reallocated from risky assets to 
safer assets. On the other hand, high-yield bonds (and potentially private credit, if we 
assume a behavior pattern similar to that of high-yield bonds) performed well during 
periods of stronger economic growth but posted lower returns during weaker economic 
periods, likely because of concerns about weakening credit quality.
Understanding how various asset classes behave under distinct macroeconomic 
regimes enables investors to tailor the asset allocation to align with their fundamental 
goals or to mitigate their fundamental risks. If the investment portfolio has a specific 
goal, such as hedging inflation risk, then it would be logical to build a portfolio that 
is dominated by asset classes that are expected to perform best amid rising inflation. 
Even if the portfolio’s goal is to generate high return over the long run, combining 
Risk-Based Approaches to Asset Classification 119
“growth” asset classes with “inflation-hedging” or “deflation-hedging” asset classes 
could make the asset allocation more resilient to changing economic and market 
conditions. This approach can be extended to macroeconomic scenario analysis and 
stress testing when the analyst evaluates how various asset allocation options would 
perform under conditions of high or low economic growth and/or inflation, and it can 
identify which economic conditions would hurt the investment portfolio the most.
RISK-BASED APPROACHES TO ASSET 
CLASSIFICATION
compare traditional and risk-based approaches to defining the 
investment opportunity set, including alternative investments
When we assign traditional and alternative asset classes to certain functional roles 
in the portfolio, or when we assess how different asset classes would perform under 
distinct macroeconomic regimes, we can also easily realize that many traditional and 
alternative asset classes share similar characteristics that can result in high correlations. 
We may put public equities in the same functional bucket as private equity, and we 
may expect elevated default rates from high-yield bonds and private credit during 
recessionary environments.
Exhibit 13  compares the betas of various traditional and alternative asset classes 
to global equities. The chart clearly shows that private equity and venture capital asset 
classes have global equity betas similar to public equites. On the other hand, betas of 
various hedge fund strategies differ significantly. Hedge fund returns, in aggregate, 
had a beta of 0.4. However, global macro or equity market-neutral strategies had betas 
as low as 0.1. The long/short “equity hedged” strategy’s beta is estimated to be much 
higher, around 0.5, which is consistent with its long equity bias.4
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 120
Exhibit 13: Global Equity Beta of Various Asset Classes, 1997–2017
Global Equity Beta
Public Equities Fixed Income Hedge Funds Real
EstateReal
AssetsPrivate
Equity
and VC1.4
0.81.01.2
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
Broad Fixed IncomeUS Equities
Governments
Inflation-Linked BondsHigh-Y ield Cr editNon US Dev Equities
Emer ging Market Equities
Hedge Funds
Commodities
Farmland
Buyout and Gr owth Eq.Public Real EstateHF Distr essed
Private Real EstateHF Equity HedgedHF Macr o
HF Equity Mkt. Neut.
Ventur e Capital
Note : Betas were estimated as a regression slope of representative index returns relative to the global 
equity return stream over the time period 1997–2017.
Sources : Authors’ calculations; index data sources are the same as those in Exhibit 12 .
Many investors have begun to view asset allocation through a risk factor lens to capture 
these similarities. In this section, we extend the risk factor asset allocation framework 
introduced in earlier readings to alternative investments using the following risk factors:
 ■Equity market return : representative of the general direction of global equity 
markets, and investors may also refer to this as the best market proxy for 
“growth. ”
 ■Size: excess return of small-cap equities over large-cap equities.
 ■Value : excess return of value versus growth stocks ( negative  factor sensitiv -
ity = growth  bias.
 ■Liquidity : the Pastor–Stambaugh liquidity factor5—a market-wide liquid -
ity measure based on the excess returns of stocks with large sensitivity to 
changes in aggregate liquidity (less-liquid stocks) versus stocks with less 
sensitivity to changing liquidity (more-liquid stocks).
 ■Duration : sensitivity to 10-year government yield changes.
 ■Inflation : sensitivity to 10-year breakeven inflation changes obtained from 
the inflation-linked bond markets.
 ■Credit spread : sensitivity to changes in high-yield spread.
 ■Currency : sensitivity to changes in the domestic currency versus a basket of 
foreign currencies.
This framework can easily be extended further to other risk factors, like momen -
tum or volatility. 
Exhibit 14  illustrates risk factor sensitivities of various traditional and alternative 
investment strategies using a construct as discussed by Naik, Devarajan, Nowobilski, 
Page, and Pedersen (2016) . The parameters in the table are regression coefficients 
based on 20 years of historical data. Quarterly index returns representing each asset 
class were regressed on the risk factors listed previously. Note that for conventional 
5 For more details on Pastor–Stambaugh liquidity factors, see Naik et al. (2016) .
Risk-Based Approaches to Asset Classification 121
reasons we changed the signs of the “nominal duration” and “credit spread” sensitiv -
ities: The 4.2 duration of broad fixed income, for example, means that this asset class 
would experience an approximate 4.2% decline in response to a 100 bps increase in 
the nominal interest rates.
Exhibit 14: Factor Sensitivity Estimates across Various Asset Classes
Asset Classes Equity Size Value LiquidityNominal 
Duration InflationCredit 
Spread Currency R-squared
US Equities 1.0               1.00
Non-US Dev 
Equities0.9             0.7 0.86
Emerging Mkt 
Equities1.1 0.5           0.5 0.66
Government Bonds         4.8       0.96
Broad Fixed Income         4.2   0.6   0.89
High-Yield Credit         4.1   4.2   0.95
Inflation-Linked 
Bonds        6.6 7.0     0.82
Hedge Funds 0.3 0.1         0.6   0.74
HF Macro 0.2 0.2     1.9 3.1 –0.9 0.1 0.28
HF Equity Mkt. 
Neut.0.1               0.14
HF Equity Hedged 0.5               0.72
HF Distressed 0.1 0.2         1.8   0.72
Commodities           18.0   0.8 0.36
Public Real Estate 0.9       4.6 0.9     0.38
Private Real Estate 0.2     0.1   2.4     0.20
Buyout & Growth 
Equities0.6 0.2 –0.3 0.1         0.70
Venture Capital 0.8 0.6 –1.8 0.2         0.38
Note:  Only statistically significant slopes are displayed in the exhibit. Sources are the same as those for 
Exhibit 12 .
In a risk factor-based asset allocation framework, the factors represent the systematic 
risks embedded in the selected asset classes and investment strategies. The primary 
systematic risk factors would fully, or almost fully, explain the behavior of broad, 
passive traditional public asset classes. There should be a relatively larger portion 
of unexplained risk in the alternative asset classes. This arises from such issues as 
the appraisal-based valuation in real estate, the idiosyncratic risks in the portfolio 
companies of private equity funds, or the idiosyncratic risks in hedge funds resulting 
from active management. (This last one is logically intuitive if you subscribe to the 
belief that returns generated by hedge fund strategies should be primarily driven by 
alpha  rather than systematic risk factors.)
The extension of the risk factor framework to alternative asset classes allows 
every asset class to be described using the same framework. Investors can therefore 
more clearly understand their sources of investment risk and identify the intended 
and unintended tilts and biases they have in the portfolio. Furthermore, a risk fac -
tor framework enables investors to more efficiently allocate capital and risk in a 
multi-dimensional framework (i.e., a framework that seeks to do more than simply 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 122
achieve the highest return at a given level of volatility). If an investor, for example, 
would like to increase the portfolio’s inflation risk-mitigating exposure, decomposing 
this specific risk factor from inflation-linked bonds, real estate, or commodity asset 
classes could help the investor to identify the asset classes and exposures that are 
most likely to facilitate that goal.
Risk factor-based approaches improve upon the traditional approaches in identi -
fying the investment opportunity set but do have certain limitations. As mentioned 
earlier, a small set of systematic risk factors is insufficient to describe the historical 
return stream of alternative asset classes. Note that all non-zero-risk factor coefficients 
displayed in the table are statistically significant based on their t-statistics. Although 
our eight illustrative factors fit the total return history of traditional asset classes with 
r-squared statistics of 0.8–1.0, the r-squared ratios for alternative investments are lower, 
ranging between 0.3 and 0.7. Increasing the number of risk factors would certainly 
improve the goodness of fit, but too many factors could make the risk factor-based 
asset allocation framework difficult to handle and interpret. In addition, certain risk 
factor sensitivities can be quite volatile, making a “point in time” factor-based defini -
tion of an asset class a poor descriptor of the class’s expected behavior. For example, 
the aggregate hedge fund inflation beta typically fluctuates in the range of 0.3 to 0.4, 
while the inflation beta of commodities fluctuates much more widely.6
EXAMPLE 2
Applying Risk Factors for Inflation Hedging
1. The CIO (chief investment officer) of the United Retired Workers Plan 
would like to reduce inflation risk in the portfolio. Based on the data dis -
played in Exhibit 14 , which asset classes would you recommend as potential 
inflation-hedging tools?
Solution:
Commodities and inflation-linked bonds have the highest factor sensitivity 
to inflation, so they are the most obvious candidates. Real estate (both pub -
lic and private) also has some potential to protect against inflation. Based 
on the data presented, macro hedge fund strategies also exhibited a positive 
inflation beta, but given their active nature, further analysis may be needed 
before choosing them as inflation-hedging vehicles.
2. The CIO is not only concerned about inflation but also rising interest rates. 
Which alternative asset classes would you recommend for consideration?
Solution:
Commodities and private real estate would be the likely asset classes to 
hedge against rising interest rates, given their zero-factor sensitivity to nom -
inal duration. Some of the hedge fund strategies also show zero-factor sensi -
tivity to duration, but the relationship may not hold true in the future given 
the actively managed nature of hedge funds. Although Exhibit 14  indicates 
equity strategies (both public and private) also show little to no sensitivity 
to rising interest rates (duration) bonds and equities have been more highly 
correlated in the past.
6 For further detail on expanding asset allocation to risk allocation, we refer to Naik et al. (2016)  and 
Cambridge Associates LLC (2013).
Risk-Based Approaches to Asset Classification 123
Illustration: Asset Allocation and Risk-Based Approaches
Let’s look at an example of how a risk-based approach may enhance traditional asset 
allocation. In Exhibit 15 , we show two investment portfolios, Portfolio A and Portfolio 
B, that have exactly the same high-level asset allocations. However, the underlying 
investments in the two portfolios are quite different. The fixed-income assets in 
Portfolio A are government bonds, while the fixed-income assets in Portfolio B are 
high-yield bonds. Hedge fund investments in Portfolio A are represented by very low 
equity beta market neutral strategies, while Portfolio B is invested in the higher beta 
long/short equity hedge funds. Similarly, Portfolio B’s investments in real assets and 
private equity have higher risk than those in Portfolio A.
Exhibit 15: Traditional Asset Allocation and Risk Contribution Comparison
Broad 
Asset 
ClassesAsset Allocation Underlying Investments % Contribution to Risk
Portfolio A Portfolio B Portfolio A Portfolio B Portfolio A Portfolio B
Fixed 
Income20% 20% Government 
BondsHigh-Yield 
Bonds−6.5% 7.6%
Public 
Equities20% 20% US Equities Non-US 
Developed 
Equities51.4% 18.2%
Hedge 
Funds20% 20% Equity Market 
NeutralLong/Short 
Equity5.4% 11.1%
Real Assets 20% 20% Inflation-linked 
bondsREITs 0.7% 13.2%
Private 
Equity20% 20% Buyout Venture Capital 48.9% 49.8%
Total 100% 100%        
  Expected 
Return5.3% 8.8%
  Volatility 5.9% 16.5%
Equity Beta 0.30 0.79
Notes:  The percentage contribution to risk is a result of three components: the asset allocation to a 
specific asset, its volatility, and its correlation with the other assets. For fixed income, the contribution 
to total risk is negative in the case of Portfolio A because government bonds have negative correlations 
with other asset classes; however, it is positive in the case of Portfolio B because high-yield bonds have 
positive correlations with the other asset classes.
Source:  Authors’ calculations.
As a result of these major differences between nominally similar broad asset allo -
cations, it is not surprising that Portfolio B has higher volatility, beta, and expected 
return compared to Portfolio A. Let’s look more closely at the risk contribution of 
each of the asset classes:
Portfolio A.
The majority of the risk in Portfolio A comes from public and private equity. Hedge 
funds contribute approximately 5% to the total risk, and fixed income actually reduces 
risk because government bonds had negative correlations with public equities in our 
historical data sample.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 124
Portfolio B.
Private equity explains about half of the total portfolio risk of Portfolio B. (In this 
portfolio, the private equity allocation is represented by the higher risk venture capi -
tal.) Public equities, hedge funds, and real assets each contribute roughly the same to 
the total risk of the portfolio. This is consistent with the equity-like characteristics of 
the underlying assets in the portfolio. The long/short equity hedged strategy has an 
equity beta of around 0.5, and REITs have an equity beta of 0.9. In Portfolio B, fixed 
income contributes positively to total risk, consistent with high-yield bonds’ positive 
correlation with equities over the time series.
Although the nominal asset allocations of the two portfolios are the same, the risk 
profile and the risk allocation among asset classes are significantly different. Let’s go 
one step further and apply the risk factor sensitivities of Exhibit 14  to our hypothet -
ical portfolios. Exhibit 16  shows the absolute contribution to total portfolio risk by 
risk factor. This approach moves beyond the borders of asset classes and aggregates 
the equity risk factor embedded in public equities, private equities, venture capital, 
and REITs into a single-factor contribution. Both portfolios are highly dominated by 
exposure to equity risk. Portfolio A’s total risk is almost fully explained by the exposure 
to the equity factor, while about 70% of Portfolio B’s total risk comes from the equity 
risk factor alone. Portfolio B also has exposure to the size and value factors, driven 
by the allocation to venture capital. Finally, we can also see that although Portfolio B 
is not directly investing in government bonds, some risk mitigation benefit still arises 
from the low “duration” component of high-yield bonds and REITs.
Exhibit 16: Absolute Contribution to Total Risk by Risk Factors
 Equity , 6.0% Equity , 11.8%Size, 0.1%Size, 0.4%
Value, 0.2%Value, 2.3%
Liquidity ,
0.1%Liquidity , 0.7%
Nominal Duration, –1.0% Nominal Duration, –1.2%Inflation, 0.5%Inflation, 0.1%Credit Spr ead, 2.1%Curr ency , 0.2%Contribution
20
15
010
5
–5
Portfolio A Portfolio B
This is an extreme example (the two portfolios have vastly different expected returns), 
but it is useful to illustrate how factor sensitivities can be used to explore the under -
lying risk exposures in seemingly similar asset allocations.
Comparing Risk-Based and Traditional Approaches
Investors often employ multiple approaches in setting their asset allocation for a port -
folio that includes alternative investments. When applying these various approaches, 
investors must consider their strengths and limitations.
Risk-Based Approaches to Asset Classification 125
Main strengths of traditional approaches:
 ■Easy to communicate.  Listing the roles of various asset classes is intuitive 
and easy to explain to the decision makers, who often have familiarity 
with the traditional asset class-based approach. Scenario analyses based 
on historical or expected behavior of various asset classes under different 
macroeconomic conditions can help to introduce quantitative aspects of the 
portfolio’s expected performance and risk and substantiate the asset alloca -
tion proposal.
 ■Relevance for liquidity management and operational considerations.  Public 
and private asset class mandates have vastly distinct liquidity profiles. Thus, 
although private and public equity would have a lot of commonality in 
their risk factor exposures, they would be positioned very differently from a 
liquidity management perspective. Similarly, investors must implement the 
target asset allocation by allocating to investment managers. The traditional 
categorization of asset classes may be necessary to identify the relevant 
mandates—what portion of the equity portfolio she would like to allocate to 
equity-oriented hedge funds rather than to long-only equity managers.
Main limitations of traditional approaches:
 ■Over-estimation of portfolio diversification.  Without a proper analytical 
framework for assessing risk, investors may have a false sense of diversifi -
cation. An allocation spread across a large number of different asset classes 
may appear to be very well diversified, when, in fact, the underlying invest -
ments may be subject to the same underlying risks.
 ■Obscured primary drivers of risk.  Investments with very different risk 
characteristics may be commingled under the same asset class category. For 
example, government bonds and high-yield bonds may both be classified as 
“fixed income, ” but each has distinct risk characteristics.
Risk-based approaches are designed to overcome some of these limitations.
Key benefits of risk-based approaches:
 ■Common risk factor identification.  Investors are able to identify common 
risk factors across all investments, whether public or private, passive or 
active.
 ■Integrated risk framework.  Investors are able to build an integrated risk 
management framework, leading to more reliable portfolio-level risk 
quantification.
Key limitations of risk-based approaches:
 ■Sensitivity to the historical look-back period.  Empirical risk factor exposure 
estimations may be sensitive to the historical sample. For example, the dura -
tion of a bond portfolio or the beta of a diversified equity portfolio could be 
reasonably stable, but the estimated inflation sensitivity of real assets can 
change rapidly over time. Thus, the analyst has to be cautious when inter -
preting some of the risk factor sensitivities, such as the “inflation beta” of 
commodities.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 126
 ■Implementation hurdles.  Establishing a strategic target to different risk fac -
tors is a very important high-level decision, but converting these risk factor 
targets to actual investment mandates requires additional considerations, 
including liquidity planning, time and effort for manager selection, and 
rebalancing policy.
 ■Determining which risk factors should be used and how to measure them 
in different asset classes .  One drawback with risk-based approaches is the 
decision on which risk factors to use is somewhat subjective and how these 
factors are measured can also be subjective. For example, if using a liquidity 
factor, should it be measured by the Pastor-Stambaugh metric or by some 
other metric?  
This issue is highlighted by noting that in Level III Hedge Fund Strategies , 
hedge fund returns are analyzed via a conditional factor model using just 
four risk factors: equities, credit, currencies, and volatility.  These risk 
factors were selected as they are deemed to provide a reasonably broad 
cross-section of risk exposures for the typical hedge fund, and each of the 
factor returns can be realized through relatively liquid instruments. 
In sum, a limitation of risk-based approaches is the potential subjectivity 
embedded in their implementation.
RISK CONSIDERATIONS, RETURN EXPECTATIONS, 
AND INVESTMENT VEHICLE
discuss investment considerations that are important in allocating to 
different types of alternative investments
In addition to the risk, return, and correlation characteristics relevant to the decision 
to invest in the alternative asset classes, many operational and practical complexities 
must be considered before finalizing a decision to invest. It is essential that the investor 
be fully aware of these complexities: Failure to grasp these differences between tra -
ditional and alternative investments can derail an investment program. The primary 
factors to consider include:
 ■properly defining risk characteristics;
 ■establishing return expectations;
 ■selection of the appropriate investment vehicle;
 ■operational liquidity issues;
 ■expense and fee considerations;
 ■tax considerations (applicable for taxable entities); and
 ■build vs. buy.
Risk Considerations
Mean–variance optimization (MVO), widely used in modeling asset allocation choices, 
cannot easily accommodate the characteristics of most alternative investments. 
MVO characterizes an asset’s risk using standard deviation. Standard deviation is 
a one-dimensional view of risk and an especially poor representation of the risk 5
Risk Considerations, Return Expectations, and Investment Vehicle 127
characteristics of alternative investments—where assets suffer some degree of illi -
quidity, valuations may be subjective, and returns may be “chunky” and not normally 
distributed. The non-standard deviation risks are usually accommodated in an MVO 
framework by assigning a higher standard deviation than might be derived solely by 
looking at the historical returns of the asset class.
Most approaches to asset allocation assume that the portfolio’s allocation to an 
asset class is always fully invested. Although this is not an assumption that is limited 
to alternatives, the problem is exaggerated with the private alternative strategies where 
it could take several years for capital to be invested and where capital is returned to 
the investor as investments are sold. Thus, it is rare that the actual  asset allocation of 
a program with a significant exposure to alternatives will mirror the modeled  asset 
allocation. This suggests that the investor must carefully (and continually) monitor 
the program’s aggregate exposures to ensure that the risks are in line with the strate -
gic asset allocation. A case in point: Some investors over-allocated to private equity, 
real-estate, and other call-down funds prior to 2008 in order to more quickly reach 
their asset allocation targets. Many of these investors then found themselves in a situ -
ation where they were receiving capital calls for these commitments during 2008 and 
2009, a period where their public assets had lost considerable value and liquidity and 
cash were scarce. Some investors had to reduce distributions, sell illiquid investments 
in the secondary market at severely discounted prices, and/or walk away from their 
fund commitments, thereby forfeiting earlier investments.
Although every strategy (and, by extension, each individual fund) will have its 
own unique risk profile, we provide two examples of the complications that might be 
encountered when modelling an allocation to alternative investments.
Short-only strategy:
A short-biased fund can provide strong diversification benefits, lowering a portfolio’s 
aggregate exposure to the equity risk factor; however, a short-only fund has a risk profile 
quite unlike a long-only equity fund. Most investors understand that a long-only equity 
fund has theoretically infinite upside potential and a downside loss bounded by zero 
(assuming no leverage). A short-biased or short-only fund has the opposite distribu -
tion. A short-selling strategy is capped on its upside but has unlimited downside risk.
Option payouts:
Some hedge fund strategies will structure their trades as call options either by owning 
call options outright or by synthetically replicating a call option (e.g., convertible bond 
arbitrage in which the manager goes long the convertible bond, short the equity for 
the same underlying, and hedges the interest rate risk). If executed properly, the fund 
would have limited downside but unlimited upside. It is difficult, if not impossible, 
to accurately model such a return profile by looking simply at a fund’s historical 
standard deviation or other risk metrics, especially if the fund’s track record does not 
encompass a full market cycle.
Return Expectations
Given the limited return history of alternative investments (relative to stocks and 
bonds) and the idiosyncratic nature of alternative investment returns, no single accepted 
approach to developing the return expectations required in an asset allocation exercise 
exists. One approach that can be applied with some consistency across asset classes is 
a “building blocks” approach: Begin with the risk-free rate, estimate the return associ -
ated with the factor exposures relevant to the asset class (e.g., credit spreads, level and 
shape of the yield curve, equity, leverage, liquidity), apply an assumption for manager 
alpha, and deduct appropriate fees (management and incentive) and taxes. Where the 
portfolio already contains an allocation to alternative investments, the underlying 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 128
money managers can be helpful in estimating exposures and return potential. The 
portfolio’s current positions can be characterized by their known exposures, rather 
than through a generic set of exposures that may not be truly representative of the 
program’s objectives for the asset class exposure. Say, for example, that the investor’s 
hedge fund program deliberately excludes long/short equity hedge funds because 
the investor chooses to take equity risk in the long-only portion of the portfolio. The 
return (and risk) characteristics of this hedge fund allocation would be very different 
from those of a broad-based allocation to hedge funds, which typically has a significant 
weight to long/short equity funds.
Investment Vehicle
Most alternative investments are implemented through a private (limited) partnership 
that is controlled by a general partner (GP), the organization and individuals that 
manage the investments. The asset owner becomes a limited partner (LP) in the pri -
vate partnership. The main rationale for using the limited partnership format is that 
it limits the investor’s liability to the amount of capital that she has contributed; she 
is not responsible for the actions of or the debts incurred by the GP . The investor may 
invest directly into a manager’s fund or through a fund of funds, a private partnership 
that invests in multiple underlying partnerships. Larger investors may also consider 
making co-investments alongside a manager into a portfolio company, or they may 
make direct private equity investments on their own.
Private limited partnerships are the dominant investment vehicle for most alter -
native investments in private equity, real estate, private credit, and real assets. In the 
United States, hedge funds will tend to employ two structures: a limited partnership 
(typically Delaware-based) or an offshore corporation or feeder fund (possibly based 
in the Cayman Islands, Bermuda, or the British Virgin Islands) that usually feeds 
into an underlying limited partnership (i.e., feeder fund). European hedge funds tend 
to register their vehicles in Ireland or Luxembourg7 as a public limited company, a 
partnership limited by shares, or a special limited partnership.
There are growing opportunities to invest in alternatives using mutual funds, 
undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS), and/or 
separately managed accounts (SMAs), although the strategies implemented through 
these more-liquid vehicles are unlikely to have the same risk/return profile as their 
less-liquid counterparts. The requirements and demands of a broader investor base 
have made mutual funds, UCITS, and SMAs increasingly popular. We describe the 
structure, benefits, and drawbacks of each of these vehicles.
Direct investment in a limited partnership:
An investor with the necessary scale and expertise can purchase limited partnership 
interests directly from the GP . GPs have broad discretion to select and manage the 
underlying investments and will typically invest a portion of their capital in the fund 
alongside the limited partners. Because each limited partnership follows its own dis -
tinct investment strategy, the investor must often invest in multiple partnerships to 
diversify idiosyncratic risk. In order to maintain the limited liability shield afforded 
by the limited partnership structure, the investor must not become too involved in 
the operation of the fund itself.
7 See Eurekahedge, “2016 Key Trends in Global Hedge Funds” (August 2016).
Risk Considerations, Return Expectations, and Investment Vehicle 129
Funds of funds (FOFs):
Many investors lack the necessary scale and investment/operational expertise to access, 
evaluate, and develop a diversified alternative investment program. An FOF pools the 
capital of these investors, allowing them to achieve an allocation to an asset class that 
would otherwise be unobtainable. An FOF manager will typically specialize in a certain 
alternative strategy, such as Asian private equity funds, and may invest in either many 
or just a handful of underlying funds. The FOF manager is responsible for sourcing, 
conducting due diligence on, and monitoring the underlying managers. Using an FOF 
simplifies the investor’s accounting and reporting: Capital calls from the underlying 
funds are frequently consolidated into a single capital call by the FOF, and investors 
receive a single report consolidating the accounting and investment results of all the 
underlying funds. The FOF manager does charge additional fees for these services. 
Investors in an FOF also lose a degree of flexibility to customize their exposures.
SMAs/funds of one:
As large institutions and family offices increased capital allocated to the alternative 
investment space, many of them demanded more-favorable investment terms and con -
ditions than those offered to smaller investors. Some alternative investment managers, 
interested in accessing these large pools of capital, have agreed to offer investment 
management services to these clients through a highly customizable SMA. SMAs 
have very high minimum investments and pose greater operational challenges for 
both the manager and the investor. In instances where an SMA is impractical, fund 
managers have created a “fund of one”—a limited partnership with a single client. 
These funds have many of the same benefits as an SMA but can be easier to imple -
ment. (For example, an SMA requires that the investor  must be approved by each of 
the counterparties to any derivatives contracts. In a fund of one, GPs must obtain and 
maintain these approvals, which is something that they do in the ordinary course of 
running their investment businesses.)
SMAs and funds of one cannot generally avail themselves of the alignment of 
interests that arises from the investment of GP capital alongside that of the LPs. 
When other clients are invested in the GP’s primary investment vehicles at the GP’s 
standard fees and to which the GP has committed some of its own capital, there is a 
risk that the GP favors these other funds in allocating capital-constrained investment 
opportunities.
Mutual funds/UCITS/publicly traded funds:
A number of open-ended mutual funds and UCITS seek to replicate some alternative 
investment strategies, particularly hedge funds. Nominally, these allow smaller investors 
to access asset classes that would otherwise be unavailable to them. It should be noted, 
however, that these vehicles often operate with regulatory restrictions that limit the 
fund manager’s ability to implement the investment strategy offered via their primary 
investment vehicle. Accordingly, the investor must be cautious in considering whether 
the track record achieved in the manager’s primary investment vehicle is representative 
of what might be achieved in a mutual fund, UCIT, or other publicly-traded vehicle. For 
example, a mutual fund that offers daily liquidity is unlikely to be a suitable investment 
vehicle for a distressed or activist investment fund, where the time horizon to realize 
investment returns may be one to two years. This “liquid-alt” space grew significantly 
following the Global Financial Crisis.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 130
LIQUIDITY
discuss investment considerations that are important in allocating to 
different types of alternative investments
Traditional assets are generally highly liquid, and the vehicles that are typically used by 
investors to access the asset class (e.g., separate accounts or daily valued commingled 
funds, such as mutual funds and UCITS) typically do not impose additional liquidity 
constraints. That is not the case with many alternative assets, where both the vehicle 
and the underlying instruments may expose the investor to some degree of liquidity 
risk. We address liquidity risks at the fund and security level separately.
Liquidity Risks Associated with the Investment Vehicle
The most common vehicle employed by alternative asset managers is the private 
limited partnership previously described. (Some investors will invest via an offshore 
corporate structure used for certain tax and regulatory reasons. This offshore cor -
poration is typically a “feeder” fund—a vehicle that channels investors’ assets to the 
master limited partnership.) The private placement memorandum (PPM) details the 
subscription and redemption features of the partnership. Liquidity provisions differ 
across asset classes but are substantially similar within asset classes. Exhibit 17  details 
the typical liquidity considerations associated with investing in a private limited 
partnership. SMA liquidity provisions may be negotiated directly with the manager.
Exhibit 17: Typical Liquidity Provisions for Alternative Investment Vehicles
  Subscription Redemption Lock-Up
Hedge Funds  ■Typically accept capital on a 
monthly or quarterly basis. ■Quarterly or annual redemp -
tions with 30 to 90 days’ 
notice required.
 ■May be subject to a gate 
limiting the amount of fund 
or investor assets that can be 
redeemed at any one redemp -
tion date.
 ■10% holdback of the redemp -
tion amount pending comple -
tion of the annual audit. ■Typically one year in the US; 
shorter in Europe.
 ■Redemptions prior to the 
lock-up period may be per -
mitted but are subject to a 
penalty, typically 10%.
Private Equity, Private 
Credit, Real Estate, and 
Real Asset Funds ■Funds typically have multi -
ple “closes. ”  The final close 
for new investors is usually 
one year after the first close. 
Committed capital is called 
for investment in stages over 
a 3-year investment period. ■No redemption provisions. 
Fund interests may be sold 
on the secondary market, 
subject to GP approval.
 ■Distributions paid as invest -
ments are realized over the 
life of the fund. Unrealized 
assets may be distributed 
in kind to the LP at fund 
termination. ■Typical 10-year life, with GP 
option to extend fund term 1 
to 2 years.6
Liquidity 131
Secondary markets:
Although fund terms may prevent investors from redeeming early, a small but growing 
secondary market for many alternative funds exists. Some brokers will match sellers 
and buyers of limited partnership interests, and some secondary funds’ main objective 
is to buy limited partnership interests from the original investor. These transactions 
typically occur at a significant discount to the net asset value (NAV) of the fund and 
usually require the GP to approve the transaction.
Understanding a drawdown structure:
Private equity/credit, private real estate, and real asset funds typically call investors’ 
capital in stages as fund investments are identified. This investment period is speci -
fied in the PPM and typically ranges from three to five years from the initial capital 
call. Thus, although an investor may have committed a specified percentage of the 
portfolio to an asset class, the allocation may not be fully funded until some point 
well into the future. We will illustrate the drawdown structure for a single fund using 
a hypothetical commitment to a real estate fund:
The Chan Family Partnership commits €5,000,000 to Uptown Real Estate LP . The 
fund has a three-year investment period. When fully invested, Uptown expects to hold 
12 to 15 properties. The capital call schedule for Uptown may look something like this:
 ■Year 1: €1,500,000 of the €5,000,000 committed is called, covering three 
investments
 ■Year 2: €2,500,000 is called, covering six investments
 ■Year 3: €500,000 is called, covering two investments
 ■Year 6: €2,000,000 is distributed by Uptown Real Estate
 ■More distributions in subsequent years
Expanding on this example, Exhibit 18  shows how the cash flows for our hypo -
thetical fund might operate throughout the fund’s life.
Exhibit 18: Hypothetical Capital Call—Distribution Schedule
Year 9:
€3,000,000 Year 8:
€1,750,000 Year 6:
€2,000,000 Fund Distributions  
Fund ContributionsYear 3:
€500,000 Year 2:
€2,500,000 Year 1:
€1,500,000 
In reality, most funds will have several capital calls in a year. It is also possible that 
a fund may make a distribution before the final capital call occurs. Because of the 
highly uncertain liquidity profile of call down (or drawdown) funds (private equity/
credit, real estate/real assets), it is incumbent on the investor to plan for multiple 
contingencies. Funds may end up calling significantly less capital than the investor 
assumed or may call capital at a faster pace than planned. Capital may be returned 
to the investor more quickly or more slowly than originally anticipated. Each of 
these scenarios could result in investors being under or over their target allocations. 
Critically, investors will want to verify that they have suitable liquidity, such that even 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 132
under adverse conditions they are able to meet their capital calls. Investors who are 
unable to meet their capital calls may be required to forfeit their entire investment in 
the fund (or such other penalties as may be specified in the PPM).
The capital commitment/drawdown structure also presents potential opportu -
nity costs for the investor. Returning to Exhibit 18 , having committed €5,000,000 to 
Uptown Real Estate LP , the Chan Family Partnership is obligated to meet the GP’s 
capital calls but must address the opportunity cost of having the committed capital 
invested in lower-returning liquid (cash) assets pending the capital call—or face the 
risk of having insufficient assets available to meet the capital call if the funds were 
invested in another asset class that has experienced a loss in the interim. Also note that 
only €4,500,000 of the €5,000,000 commitment was called before distributions began.
Liquidity Risks Associated with the Underlying Investments
The investor must be aware of any potential mismatch between the fund terms and 
the liquidity profile of the underlying instruments held by the fund. This is particularly 
important if the investor is negotiating fund terms or if other investors have terms that 
may be different from his own. Because the private market funds rarely offer interim 
liquidity, this problem most often arises in hedge funds. We provide a few examples 
of the issues an investor may encounter.
Equity-oriented hedge funds:
The majority of assets in a typical equity-oriented hedge fund are liquid, marketable 
securities compatible with monthly or quarterly fund-level liquidity terms. Short posi -
tions may be notably less liquid than long positions, so funds that make greater use 
of short selling will have correspondingly lower overall liquidity. This should be taken 
into consideration when evaluating the potential for a liquidity mismatch between the 
fund’s terms and the underlying holdings. Some otherwise liquid hedge fund strategies 
may own a portion of their holdings in illiquid or relatively illiquid securities. The GP 
may designate these securities as being held in a “side pocket. ” Such “side-pocketed” 
securities are not subject to the fund’s general liquidity terms. The redeeming inves -
tor’s pro rata share of the side pocket would remain in the fund and be distributed 
at such time as the fund manager liquidates these assets, which could take quarters 
or even years to accomplish. If the percentage of assets held in side pockets is large, 
this could render the fund’s liquidity terms irrelevant. The investor must evaluate the 
illiquidity challenges inherent in the underlying holdings, including side pockets, in 
order to estimate a liquidity profile for the total portfolio.
Event-driven hedge funds:
Event-driven strategies, by their nature, tend to have longer investment horizons. 
The underlying investments in a merger arbitrage strategy, for example, are generally 
liquid, but the nature of the strategy is such that returns are realized in “chunks. ” It is 
in the manager’s and the investor’s interests to ensure that the liquidity terms provide 
the necessary flexibility to execute the investment thesis. A hedge fund focused on 
distressed investing is dealing with both the “workout” horizon (the time frame over 
which the negotiations between the creditors and the company are being conducted) 
and the lesser liquidity of the distressed assets. The fund terms for a distressed strategy 
are likely to be much longer than other hedge fund strategies. (In fact, many distressed 
funds choose to organize in a private equity fund structure.)
Fees and Expenses, Tax Considerations, and Other Considerations 133
Relative value hedge funds:
Many relative value hedge funds will invest in various forms of credit, convertibles, 
derivatives, or equities that have limited or at least uncertain liquidity characteristics. 
Many funds will include provisions in the fund documents to restrict redemptions 
under certain scenarios so that they are not forced to sell illiquid securities at inop -
portune moments. Without such provisions, the fund manager may be forced to sell 
what securities they can (i.e., the more liquid holdings) rather than the securities that 
they want.  This could have the unfortunate consequence of leaving remaining investors 
in the fund holding a sub-optimally illiquid portfolio. On the other hand, funds that 
deal in managed futures or similar instruments may have very flexible terms (daily or 
weekly liquidity, only a few days notification, etc.). This was a scenario many hedge 
fund managers faced during the Global Financial Crisis as investors made significant 
redemption requests to meet their own cash needs. The liquid funds were dispro -
portionately affected as investors sought to raise cash wherever they could find it.
Leverage:
A fund’s use of leverage and its agreements with counterparties providing the lever -
age can also affect the alignment between fund terms and the investment strategy. If 
a strategy is levered, lenders have a first claim on the assets. The lenders’ claims are 
superior to those of the LPs, and the lenders have preferential liquidity terms; most 
lenders can make a margin call on stocks, bonds, or derivatives positions with just 
two days’ notice. Given that margin calls are most likely to happen when the markets 
(and/or the fund) are stressed, the LPs’ liquidity can evaporate as the most-liquid 
positions in the portfolio are sold to meet margin calls. The need to de-lever and sell 
assets to meet margin calls will typically result in a lower return when the market 
eventually recovers. 
FEES AND EXPENSES, TAX CONSIDERATIONS, AND 
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
In addition to management fees of 0.5% to 2.5% of assets and incentive fees of 10% to 
20% of returns, investments in alternative assets often entail higher expenses passed 
through to or paid directly by the investor. These fees can result in a significant varia -
tion between the gross and net of fee returns. Consider a hedge fund that was earning 
a 3% gross quarterly return (12.6% annualized). After deducting a 2% management 
and a 20% incentive fee, accrued quarterly, the net return at year-end is just 8.2%.
Fees can have a larger impact on the difference between gross and net returns for 
such call-down-type fund structures as private equity funds, where the management 
fee is charged on committed  capital, not invested capital. If the manager is slow to 
deploy capital, there can be a pronounced J-curve effect (negative IRRs in the early 
years) that can be difficult to overcome (the adage ‘it takes a 100% return to recover 
from a 50% loss’).
In addition, most alternative investment funds will pass through normal fund 
expenses, including legal, custodial, audit, administration, and accounting fees. For 
smaller funds, these additional costs can add up to another 0.5%. Larger funds can 
spread these same costs out over the larger asset base, and the pass-through to investors 
is likely to be in the range of 0.05% to 0.20% of assets. Some of these expenses have 
a limited life (e.g., the capitalized organizational expenses), so the impact can vary 
over time. Funds may also pass through to investors costs associated with acquiring 7
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 134
an asset, including the due diligence costs and any brokerage commissions paid. A 
careful evaluation of the fund’s offering documents is essential to understanding the 
all-in cost of an investment in alternatives.
Tax Considerations
For taxable investors, the tax implications associated with many alternatives can have 
a significant impact on their relative attractiveness. In many instances, a tax ineffi -
cient strategy, one that generates substantial short-term gains or taxable income, can 
significantly erode the anticipated return benefits. This arises frequently with many 
hedge fund strategies, especially those funds and fund companies where tax-exempt 
investors dominate the client base and the fund manager may be insensitive to tax 
efficiency. Vehicle selection becomes an important tool to mitigate potential tax 
consequences. For example, certain Asia-based investors may use European or other 
offshore vehicles that feed into US strategies in order to mitigate US tax withholding. 
Conversely, some funds benefit from preferential tax treatment that might add to its 
relative attractiveness.
Here are a few examples of these tax considerations:
 ■The US tax code has provisions that favor real estate, timber, and energy 
investments. Timber sales, for example, are taxed at lower capital gains rates 
rather than as ordinary income and may benefit from a depletion deduction. 
Commercial and residential building assets can be depreciated according to 
various schedules, with the depreciation offsetting income received on those 
assets. Some oil and natural gas royalty owners may benefit from a depletion 
deduction, offsetting income generated from the sale of the oil or gas.
 ■Some alternative investment strategies can generate unrelated business 
income tax (UBIT). UBIT arises when a US tax-exempt organization 
engages in activities that are not related to the tax-exempt purpose of that 
organization. Since most tax-exempt entities seek to mitigate (if not avoid) 
taxes, they will want to verify whether such a fund might generate UBIT 
and, if so, whether the fund manager has an offshore vehicle that may shield 
the investor from such income.
 ■The taxable investor faces additional costs and operational hurdles because 
of the more complex tax filings. Some taxable investors must estimate their 
expected annual income, including income that is derived from investments. 
Deriving an accurate estimate can be a challenge. Unfortunately, if the mis -
estimation is large enough it might result in tax penalties.
Tax considerations, like fees, will affect the return assumptions used in the asset 
allocation exercise.
Other Considerations
Although smaller investors seeking to build a diversified alternative investment pro -
gram are generally constrained to use an intermediary, such as a fund of funds, large 
investors have the opportunity to build a program in-house and must decide whether 
this approach is appropriate given their governance structure. Key questions to explore 
in evaluating the options include the following:
 ■What is the likelihood that the investor can identify and gain access to the 
top-tier managers in the investment strategy?
Truly differentiated strategies and top-tier managers are notoriously 
capacity constrained, which tends to limit the amount of assets they can 
reasonably manage without negatively affecting investment returns. Fund 
Fees and Expenses, Tax Considerations, and Other Considerations 135
managers who recognize this problem frequently limit the number of 
investors that they allow into their fund and may close their doors to new 
clients or capital. This can make it extremely difficult for investors to find 
and access top-tier managers. Investors who are subject to public disclo -
sure requirements may be rejected by a manager who believes that success 
is based on a proprietary informational edge that could be eroded through 
these required public disclosures. Many studies on alternative assets have 
concluded that it may not be worth the costs and resources required to be 
successful in this space if investors do not have access to top-tier funds.
 ■What is the likelihood that the investor will be accorded the access needed 
to conduct effective due diligence on an investment strategy?
It is not enough to know when or if to invest with a fund manager; it is 
equally, if not more, important to be able to determine when to terminate 
the relationship. Having poor to no access to the key decision makers within 
the organization could make it difficult to ascertain if the conditions have 
changed such that a redemption is warranted. The situation could be even 
worse if other clients have good (or preferential) access to the fund manager, 
which might result in their redeeming early, leaving other, less-informed 
investors subject to gates or other more-restrictive redemption terms that 
could be triggered.
 ■What skills and resources does the investor have in-house to evaluate and 
monitor an alternative investment program?
This question is evaluated through a consideration of the cost tradeoffs, the 
investment expertise of in-house staff, the desire to tailor an investment 
program to investor-specific wants and needs, and the degree of control.
 ●Cost is typically the overriding factor in the decision to build a program 
in-house or buy an existing off-the-shelf product. The all-in costs of 
compensation, benefits, rent, technology, reporting, travel, overhead, and 
other miscellaneous expenses associated with managing an alternative 
investments program can far exceed the costs associated with running a 
traditional asset portfolio. However, very large organizations may be able 
to justify the costs of building in-house teams.
 ●Investors seeking to leverage a manager’s expertise through co-invest -
ments and other direct investment opportunities must build an in-house 
team with the expertise to evaluate specific securities and deals and 
must provide the infrastructure needed to support those efforts.
 ●Investors who require highly customized investment programs might be 
poorly served by consultants or FOFs who typically gain scale and mar -
gin by providing solutions that can be broadly applied to a large num -
ber of clients. For example, an endowment that wants their alternative 
investment program to consider environmental, social, and governance 
(ESG) factors (i.e., socially responsible investing) may have a difficult 
time finding an investment consultant who can deliver on the client’s 
specific ESG requirements. Or, a family office that wants to emphasize 
tax-efficient angel investments might need to hire in-house resources in 
order to find and supervise these more specialized investments.
 ●Those investors who desire a high degree of control and/or influence 
over the implementation of the investment program are more likely to 
have this need met through an in-house program.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 136
EXAMPLE 3
Considerations in Allocating to Alternative Investments
The investment committee (IC) for a small endowment has decided to invest 
in private equity for the first time and has agreed upon a 10% strategic target. 
The internal investment team comprises the CIO (chief investment officer) and 
two analysts. The IC asks the CIO to recommend an implementation plan at 
the next meeting.
1. What are the options the CIO should include in her report as it relates to 
vehicles, and what factors might influence the recommendation?
Solution:
The primary considerations for the CIO include the size of the private 
equity allocation, the team’s expertise with private equity, and the available 
resources. Because this is a small endowment, it may be difficult to commit 
enough capital to achieve an adequate level of diversification. The size of the 
fund’s investment team is also likely to be a concern. Unless there are finan -
cial resources to add a private equity specialist and/or employ an outside 
consultant, the fund-of-funds route would likely be the optimal vehicle(s) to 
implement a diversified private equity program.
2. The IC provided no guidance as to expectations for when the investment 
program should reach its 10% target weight. What additional information 
should the CIO gather before presenting her plan of action?
Solution:
The CIO should factor in the cash flows and anticipated liquidity profile 
of the overall endowment in considering the speed with which they would 
commit to a significant PE program. If, for example, the foundation is em -
barking on a capital campaign and anticipated distributions are small over 
the next few years, then commitments may be accelerated after factoring 
in an appropriate vintage year diversification. (Because private investment 
returns are very sensitive to the fund’s vintage year, it is common for inves -
tors to build up to a full allocation over a period of years, called vintage year 
diversification.) However, if the rest of the investment program is heavily 
exposed to illiquid investments (e.g., real estate, certain hedge fund strate -
gies) and anticipated distributions to fund operating expenses are high, the 
CIO may want to commit at a slower pace.
EXAMPLE 4
Considerations in Allocating to Alternative Investments
A $100 million client of a family office firm has requested that all public securi -
ties investments meet certain ESG criteria. The ESG ratings will be provided by 
an independent third-party firm that provides a rating for most public equities 
and some fixed-income issuers. Moreover, the family would like to dedicate a 
percentage of assets to support an “environmental sustainability” impact theme.
Suitability Considerations 137
1. Which alternative investment strategies may not be suitable for this client 
given the ESG requirements?
Solution:
Because the ESG criteria apply to all public securities, most hedge fund 
strategies would be precluded because they are typically owned in a com -
mingled vehicle, such as a limited partnership or a mutual fund where 
transparency of holdings is limited and the investor has no influence over 
the composition of the underlying portfolio. Separate account strategies are 
available for certain large portfolios, but it is unlikely that a $100 million 
client would be eligible for a custom portfolio that would be allocating only 
a small asset base to any particular fund.
2. What additional information might the family office firm require from the 
client in order to meet the environmental sustainability threshold?
Solution:
The client and the manager would need to agree on a clear definition of 
environmental sustainability and the types of investments that might qualify 
for this theme. It is unlikely that most hedge funds, private credit, energy, or 
infrastructure strategies would be considered to positively impact environ -
mental sustainability. The most likely candidates for consideration could be 
timber, sustainable farmland, and clean-tech funds under the venture capital 
category.
SUITABILITY CONSIDERATIONS
discuss suitability considerations in allocating to alternative 
investments
Alternative investments are not appropriate for all investors. We discuss briefly sev -
eral investor  characteristics that are important to a successful alternative investment 
program.
Investment Horizon
Investors with less than a 15-year investment horizon should generally avoid invest -
ments in private real estate, private real assets, and private equity funds. An alternative 
investment program in private markets may take 5 to 7 years to fully develop and 
another 10 to 12 years to unwind, assuming no new investments are made after the 
7-year mark. Even a 10-year horizon may be too short to develop a robust private 
alternative investment program.
Other strategies can tolerate a shorter investment focus. Many hedge fund strat -
egies that focus on public equities or managed futures have much shorter lock-ups 
(on the order of months or not at all). Some strategies can be entered and exited in 
shorter time frames, and the purchase or sale of limited partnership interests on the 
secondary market may be used to shorten the entry and exit phases of the process. 8
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 138
However, the alternative investment program has a higher likelihood of success if 
the investor adopts a long-horizon approach coupled with an understanding of the 
underlying investment processes.
Expertise
A successful alternative investment program requires that the investor understand 
the risks entailed and the market environments that drive success or failure of each of 
the strategies. Understanding the breadth of the alternative investment opportunities 
and the complexity of strategies within each alternative class requires a relatively high 
level of investment expertise. Even if the investor is highly experienced, the risk of 
information asymmetry between the limited partner (LP) and the general partner (GP) 
is always there. A pension fund without full-time investment staff, or an individual 
without the resources to hire an adviser with a dedicated alternative investments 
team, is unlikely to have the investment expertise necessary to implement a successful 
alternative investment program.
Additionally, the investment philosophy of the asset owner (or its overseers) 
must be consistent with the principles of alternative investments. An investor whose 
investment philosophy is rooted in a belief that markets are fundamentally efficient 
may struggle to embrace an alternative investment program, where success is predi -
cated on active management. A mismatch in philosophy could very well be a set up 
for failure when the alternative investments underperform traditional asset classes.
Governance
A robust investment governance framework ensures that an alternative investment 
program is structured to meet the needs of the investor. The following are hallmarks 
of a strong governance framework suitable to an alternative investment program:
 ■The long- and short-term objectives of the investment program are clearly 
articulated.
 ■Decision rights and responsibilities are allocated to those individuals with 
the knowledge, capacity, and time required to critically evaluate possible 
courses of action.
 ■A formal investment policy has been adopted to govern the day-to-day 
operations of the investment program.
 ■A reporting framework is in place to monitor the program’s progress toward 
the agreed-on goals and objectives.
Investors without a strong governance program are less likely to develop a suc -
cessful alternative investment program.
Transparency
Investors must be comfortable with less than 100% transparency into the underlying 
holdings of their alternative investment managers. In real estate, private equity, and 
real asset funds, the investor is typically buying into a “blind pool”—committing 
capital for investment in a portfolio of as-yet-unidentified assets. During the course 
of investment due diligence, the investor may have looked at the assets acquired in 
the manager’s previous funds, but there is no assurance that the new fund will look 
anything like the prior funds. Hedge fund managers are generally reluctant to disclose 
the full portfolio to investors on an ongoing basis. Even if you were to have access to 
the full underlying portfolio, it is rarely apparent where the true risk exposures lie 
without a detailed understanding of the investment themes the manager is pursuing.
Suitability Considerations 139
Reporting for alternative funds is often less transparent than investors are accus -
tomed to seeing on their stock and bond portfolios. Generally, no legal requirements 
mandate the frequency, timing, and details of fund reporting for private investment 
partnerships. For many illiquid strategies (real estate/assets, private equity/credit), 
reporting is often received well past month- or quarter-end deadlines that investors 
are accustomed to with their traditional investments.
A typical hedge fund report, usually available on a quarterly basis, may detail per -
formance, top 10 holdings, and some general commentary on the capital markets as 
well as some factors that influenced fund performance. The hedge fund manager may 
also provide a risk report that broadly outlines the major risk exposures of the fund. 
There is no commonality among the risk reports provided from fund to fund. This 
hampers an investor’s efforts to develop a picture of aggregate risk exposure. Clients 
with separately managed accounts have access to portfolio holdings and may be able 
to produce their own risk reporting with a common set of risk metrics.
Private equity funds will provide more transparency into portfolio holdings, but the 
private equity fund report is unlikely to “slice-and-dice” the exposures by geography, 
sector, or industry. The investor must gather the additional information needed to 
develop a fuller exposure of the portfolio’s risk exposures and progress toward meeting 
expectations. Private equity managers typically provide an abbreviated quarterly report 
with a more detailed annual report following the completion of the fund’s annual audit.
This lack of transparency can shield questionable actions by GPs. In 2014, the US 
Securities and Exchange Commission found that more than 50% of private equity 
firms had collected or misallocated fees without proper disclosure to their clients.8 
This study and subsequent lawsuits have increased transparency within the industry, 
although the industry remains opaque at many levels.
Reporting for private real estate funds commonly consists of a quarterly report with 
details on the fund’s size, progress in drawdowns, realizations to date, and valuations of 
unrealized investments as well as market commentary relevant to the fund’s strategy. 
Reports typically include details on each investment such as the original acquisition 
cost(s), square footage, borrowing details (e.g., cost of debt, leverage ratios, and debt 
maturity dates), and fundamental metrics regarding the health of the properties (e.g., 
occupancy rates and, if appropriate, the estimated credit health of tenants). Often there 
is qualitative commentary on the health of the property’s submarket, on anticipated 
next steps, and on the timing of realization(s). Reports are typically issued with a 
one-quarter lag to allow sufficient time to update property valuations. Annual reports, 
which frequently require updated third-party appraisals, may not be available until 
the second quarter following year end.
Investors should ensure that funds use independent administrators to calculate 
the fund and LPs’ NAV. These administrators are also responsible for processing cash 
flows, including contributions, fee payments, and distributions that are consistent 
with the fund documents. The use of independent administrators is common practice 
among hedge funds. It is relatively uncommon for a fund investing in illiquid strate -
gies (e.g., private equity/credit, real estate/natural resources) to use an independent 
administrator. Funds that do not use third-party administrators have wide discretion 
in valuing assets. In the midst of the Great Financial Crisis, it was not uncommon 
for two different private equity firms with ownership interests in the same company 
to provide very different estimates of the company’s value.
The lack of transparency common with many alternative investments can challenge 
risk management and performance evaluation. High-quality alternative investment 
managers will engage an independent and respected accounting firm to perform an 
annual audit of the fund; the audit report should be available to the LPs.
8 Andrew Ceresney, “Keynote Address: Private Equity Enforcement, ” Securities Enforcement Forum West 
(12 May 2016).
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 140
Regulatory requirements for mutual funds and UCITS funds require such stan -
dardized information as costs, expected risks, and performance data. Additional 
information may also be available on a periodic basis. Information provided to one 
investor should be available to all shareholders. These rules have been interpreted by 
some mutual fund/UCITS managers to mean that they cannot provide more-detailed, 
non-standardized information given the complexity of sharing it with a broad audience. 
This can possibly restrict the level of transparency certain shareholders can obtain 
for these vehicles.
EXAMPLE 5
Suitability Considerations in Allocating to Alternative 
Investments
The Christian family office is concerned with investor or manager fraud and so 
will invest only in separately managed accounts (SMAs).
1. What are the benefits and drawbacks to the use of SMAs?
Solution:
Although an SMA allows for greater transparency and control of capi -
tal flows (the manager does not generally have the authority to distribute 
capital from the client account), it has several potential disadvantages: 1) 
SMAs are not available or appropriate for many alternative strategies; thus, 
the requirement to invest via an SMA may limit the ability to develop an 
optimal alternative investment program. 2) A manager cannot invest along -
side the client in the client’s SMA. This may reduce the alignment of interest 
between the manager and the client and may give rise to conflicts of interest 
as trades are allocated between the SMA and the manager’s other funds.
2. The 75-year-old patriarch of the Christian family would like to consider 
a significant private equity allocation in a trust that he oversees on behalf 
of his youngest daughter. This would be the first alternative investment 
commitment made with any of the family’s assets. The daughter is 40 years 
old. She will receive one-half of the assets outright upon his death. The 
remainder of the assets will be held in trust subject to the terms of the trust 
agreement. List some of the reasons why private equity may or may not be 
appropriate for this trust.
Solution:
 ■Successful private equity investment requires a long time horizon. 
Given the patriarch’s age, it is likely that half of the trust’s assets will 
be distributed before the private equity program has had time to 
mature. This may lead to an unintended doubling in the size of the 
private equity allocation.
 ■The patriarch has no experience investing in alternative assets. Unless 
he is willing to commit the time, money, and effort and engage an out -
side adviser with the relevant expertise and access to top-tier funds, 
the likelihood of a successful private equity investment program would 
be low.
Asset Allocation Approaches and Statistical Properties and Challenges 141
 ■Because the beneficiary of the trust is relatively young, the time 
horizon of the investment likely matches the profile of the underlying 
investor. It may be appropriate for the trust to invest in long-dated 
private equity assets, provided the investment is sized appropriately 
and the necessary expertise has been retained.
ASSET ALLOCATION APPROACHES AND STATISTICAL 
PROPERTIES AND CHALLENGES
discuss approaches to asset allocation to alternative investments
We mentioned earlier that one approach to determining the desired allocation to the 
alternative asset classes is to make the initial asset allocation decision using only the 
broad, liquid asset classes and do a second iteration of the asset allocation exercise 
incorporating alternative assets. After first addressing the challenges in developing risk 
and return assumptions for alternative asset classes, we then discuss three primary 
approaches that investors use to approach this second iteration.
1. Monte Carlo simulation.  We discuss how Monte Carlo simulation may be 
used to generate return scenarios that relax the assumption of normally 
distributed returns. We illustrate how simulation can be applied to estimate 
the long-term risk profile and return potential of various asset allocation 
alternatives, and, in particular, we evaluate whether various asset allocation 
alternatives would satisfy the investor’s ultimate investment objectives.
2. Optimization techniques.  Mean–variance optimization (MVO) typically 
over-allocates to alternative asset classes, partly because risk is underesti -
mated because of stale or infrequent pricing and the underlying assumption 
that returns are normally distributed. Practitioners usually address this bias 
towards alternatives by establishing limits on the allocations to alterna -
tives. Optimization methods that incorporate downside risk (mean–CVaR 
optimization) or take into account skew may be used to enhance the asset 
allocation process.
3. Risk factor-based approaches . Risk factor-based approaches to alternative 
asset allocation can be applied to develop more robust asset allocation 
proposals.
These analytical techniques complement each other, and investors frequently rely 
on all of them rather than just using one or the other. Monte Carlo simulation can 
provide simulated non-normal (fat-tailed) data for a mean–CVaR optimization, but 
simulation can also be applied to analyze the long-term behavior of various asset 
allocation alternatives that are the results of portfolio optimization.9
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 142
Statistical Properties and Challenges of Asset Returns
Alternative investments present the modeler with a number of analytical challenges. 
These two are particularly relevant in the asset allocation process:
1. Appraisal-based valuations used in private alternative investments often 
lead to stale and/or artificially smoothed returns. Volatility and other risk 
measures estimated based on these smoothed time series would potentially 
understate the actual, fundamental risk.
2. Although even the public asset classes can exhibit non-normal return 
distributions, skewness and fat tails (excess kurtosis) are more pronounced 
with many of the alternative investment strategies. Leverage, sensitivity to 
the disappearance of liquidity, and even the asymmetric nature of perfor -
mance fees all contribute to additional skewness and excess kurtosis among 
alternative investments. This option–payoff style quality can undermine a 
simplistic statistical approach.
Asset allocators use various analytical approaches to mitigate the impact of these 
challenges.
Stale Pricing and Unsmoothing
Appraisal-based valuation is common in private real estate and private equity. The 
valuation parameter assumptions in the appraisal process change quite slowly. This 
has a smoothing effect on reported returns and gives the illusion that illiquid assets’ 
performance is much less volatile than that of public marketable assets with similar 
fundamental characteristics. This issue also affects hedge funds in which the manager 
invests in illiquid or less-liquid assets whose valuations are updated infrequently or are 
using models with static valuation assumptions. These artificially smoothed returns 
can be detected by testing the return stream for serial correlation. If serial correla -
tion is detected and found statistically significant, the analyst needs to unsmooth the 
returns to get a more accurate representation of the risk and return characteristics 
of the asset class we are modelling.
To illustrate unsmoothing, we use a simple approach described by Ang (2014) . 
Exhibit 19  illustrates the reported quarterly return history of the Cambridge Associates 
Private Equity Index, as well as the unsmoothed series.9 The annualized volatility 
estimated using the reported quarterly return data and scaling using the square root 
of time convention is 9.5%.10 The widely accepted rule of scaling by the square root of 
time, however, is based on the assumption of serially uncorrelated, normally-distributed 
returns. In our example, the serial correlation of the quarterly reported private equity 
returns is 0.38, which, given the number of observations, is significant with a t-statistic 
of 4.09. Because our returns are serially correlated, we want to unsmooth the returns 
to get a better estimate of volatility. The volatility calculated on the unsmoothed 
return series is 14.0%, significantly higher than the volatility estimated from the 
unsmoothed data.
9 We used the following formula to unsmooth the report total return time series:
rt,unsmoothed  = (rt,reported  – s × rt–1,reported )/(1 – s),
where s denotes the estimated serial correlation of the time series.
10 To scale volatility estimates to a longer (or shorter) time horizon, the volatility can be multiplied by the 
square root of time. For example, if we know the quarterly volatility and want an annual volatility estimate, 
we would multiply the quarterly volatility estimate by the square root of 4. (This scaling convention assumes 
price changes are independent and returns are not serially correlated over time.)
Asset Allocation Approaches and Statistical Properties and Challenges 143
Exhibit 19:  C|A Private Equity Index Quarterly Returns
C|A  US Private Equity Index Unsmoothed Private Equity IndexReturns
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
Dec/91 Dec/98 Jun/95 Jun/02 Dec/05 Jun/09 Dec/12 Jun/16
Exhibit 20  illustrates serial correlation and volatility estimates based on quarterly 
returns of a broad range of asset classes. Although the serial correlation of public 
marketable asset classes is generally low, private asset classes and some hedge fund 
strategies have higher serial correlations that indicate stronger smoothing effects. The 
higher the serial correlation in the reported return series, the larger the difference 
between the volatility based on the unsmoothed and reported (smoothed) return data. 
The impact of smoothing is the highest in the case of private investments, as sug -
gested by the serial correlation for private real estate (0.85) and private equity (0.38). 
The unsmoothed volatility of private real estate is, in fact, three times the volatility 
that we would estimate based on the reported returns. Given the serial correlation 
evident in private alternative strategies, it is not surprising that the distressed hedge 
fund strategy exhibits higher serial correlation (0.36) than other hedge fund strategies.
Exhibit 20: The Effect of Serial Correlation on Volatility
Quarterly Data Dec. 1997–Sept. 
2017Serial 
CorrelationVolatility 
(reported returns)Volatility 
(unsmoothed)
US Equities 0.03 17.0% 17.7%
Non-US Developed Market Equities 0.08 19.2% 20.8%
Emerging Market Equities 0.17 26.2% 30.8%
Governments −0.01 4.9% 4.9%
Broad Fixed Income 0.02 3.4% 3.5%
High-Yield Credit 0.34 10.0% 14.3%
Inflation-Linked Bonds 0.12 5.0% 5.7%
Hedge Funds—Aggregate 0.15 8.1% 9.5%
HF Macro 0.08 5.4% 5.9%
HF Equity Market Neutral 0.17 3.5% 4.1%
HF Equity Hedged 0.19 10.7% 13.1%
HF Distressed 0.36 8.9% 13.0%
Commodities 0.14 25.2% 28.8%
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 144
Quarterly Data Dec. 1997–Sept. 
2017Serial 
CorrelationVolatility 
(reported returns)Volatility 
(unsmoothed)
Public Real Estate 0.15 20.4% 24.0%
Private Real Estate 0.85 4.6% 13.8%
Private Equity 0.38 10.7% 15.7%
Skewness and Fat Tails
A common and convenient assumption behind asset pricing theory, as well as mod -
els applied for asset allocation and risk analytics, is that asset returns are normally 
distributed. Both academic researchers and practitioners are widely aware of the 
limitations of this assumption, but no standard quantitative method to replace this 
assumption of normality exists. Skewness and excess kurtosis, or so-called “fat tails, ” 
in the distributions of empirically observed asset returns may lead to underestimated 
downside risk measures in the case of both traditional and alternative asset classes. 
Non-normality of returns, however, can be more severe in private alternative asset 
class and certain hedge fund strategies than in most of the traditional asset classes.
In Exhibit 21 , we show skewness and excess kurtosis parameters calculated based 
on 20 years of unsmoothed quarterly return data of various public and alternative 
asset classes. We also show 95% quarterly conditional value at risk (CVaR) estimates 
based on the assumption of normally distributed asset returns, as well as based on 
the observed (actual) distributions. Positive skewness indicates smaller downside risk 
potential, while negative skewness indicates greater downside risk potential. Excess 
kurtosis (i.e., a kurtosis parameter exceeding 3) similarly points toward greater down -
side risk than would be apparent from the numbers calculated using the assumption of 
normally-distributed returns. The observed (actual) CVaR estimates typically exceed 
the normal distribution-based CVaR figures when kurtosis is high and skewness is 
negative. Equity market-neutral hedge funds and private real estate have the biggest 
relative  differences between the 95% normal distribution CVaR and the observed 
CVaR (columns C and D divided by column C). Both of these strategies have negative 
skewness and fairly high excess kurtosis. It’s interesting to note that distressed hedge 
funds similarly have high kurtosis and negative skewness, but the difference in tail 
risk measures becomes mainly visible at the 99% confidence level, where the extreme 
but infrequent losses may occur.
Exhibit 21: Normal Distribution Assumption and Observed Downside Risk Measures
  (A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (F)
Unsmoothed  Quar -
terly Data Dec. 1997–
Sept. 2017 SkewnessExcess 
Kurtosis95% CVaR (Nor -
mal Distribution)95% CVaR 
(Observed)99% CVaR 
(Normal 
Distribution)99% CVaR 
(Observed)
US Equities −0.51 0.43 −15.3% −17.7% −20.3% −23.9%
Non-US Dev Equities −0.19 0.29 −18.9% −19.8% −24.8% −20.7%
Emerging Mkt Equities −0.23 −0.03 −28.2% −25.4% −37.0% −27.7%
Governments 0.59 0.39 −3.5% −3.2% −4.9% −4.0%
Broad Fixed Income −0.05 −0.41 −2.1% −2.4% −3.1% −3.1%
High-Yield Credit 0.18 6.14 −7.9% −9.8% −10.8% −19.7%
Inflation-Linked Bonds −0.32 1.08 −4.2% −4.2% −5.8% −8.1%
Hedge Funds −0.17 1.69 −7.6% −8.6% −10.3% −9.7%
Asset Allocation Approaches and Statistical Properties and Challenges 145
  (A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (F)
Unsmoothed  Quar -
terly Data Dec. 1997–
Sept. 2017 SkewnessExcess 
Kurtosis95% CVaR (Nor -
mal Distribution)95% CVaR 
(Observed)99% CVaR 
(Normal 
Distribution)99% CVaR 
(Observed)
HF Macro 0.36 0.85 −4.3% −4.1% −6.0% −5.1%
HF Equity Market 
Neutral−1.17 3.55 −2.9% −3.9% −4.1% −5.4%
HF Equity Hedged 0.08 2.24 −10.8% −10.6% −14.5% −12.7%
HF Distressed −1.25 3.52 −10.8% −11.1% −14.5% −16.9%
Commodities −0.71 1.62 −28.4% −30.6% −36.6% −50.6%
Public Real Estate −0.88 4.60 −20.9% −24.5% −27.7% −40.2%
Private Real Estate −2.80 9.62 −11.3% −15.4% −15.3% −27.9%
Private Equity −0.46 2.05 −12.2% −15.7% −16.7% −22.6%
Source:  Authors’ calculations. 
To further illustrate the impact of non-normality on the downside risk, in Exhibit 22  
we compare the ratio of observed to normal CVaR measures with the skewness and 
excess kurtosis. Although the skewness or excess kurtosis alone doesn’t fully explain 
the relative difference between observed and normal 95% CVaR (positive skewness may 
compensate high excess kurtosis or vice versa), we can see the evidence that higher 
kurtosis or more negative skewness usually increases the likely severity of any tail risk.
Exhibit 22: The Impact of Skewness and Kurtosis on Tail Risk
Ratio of Observed to Normal 95% CV aR
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
–3.0 –2.0 –2.5 –1.5 –0.5 0.5 1.0 –1.0 0
Skewness of Unsmoothed Quarterly ReturnUS Equities
Non-US Dev Equities
Emer ging Mkt Equities Government BondsBroad Fixed IncomeHigh-Y ield Cr edit
Inflation-Linked BondsHedge Funds
HF Macr oHF Equity Mkt. Neut.
HF Equity HedgedHF Distr essedCommoditiesPublic Real EstatePrivate Real Estate
Private Equity
Source : Authors’ calculations. 
Analysts can choose to incorporate non-normality into their analyses in a few different 
ways. The most obvious and straightforward choice is to use empirically observed asset 
returns instead of working with the normal distribution. Still, in private investments 
where we typically have only quarterly return data, the analyses may be subject to 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 146
serious limitations. Even with 20 years of quarterly return data, we have only 80 data 
points (and the industry has changed significantly over this time, further straining 
the validity of the data).
With sufficient data, analysts and researchers can capture the effects of fat tails 
by using advanced mathematical or statistical models:
 ■Time-varying volatility models (e.g., stochastic volatility), which assume that 
volatility is not constant over time but changes dynamically, can be used.
 ■Regime-switching models capture return, volatility, and correlation char -
acteristics in different market environments (bull/bear or low volatility 
and moderate correlation vs. high volatility and elevated correlation). The 
combination of two or more normal distributions with different average 
returns, volatilities, and correlations could capture skewed and fat-tailed 
distributions.
 ■Extreme value theory and other fat-tailed distributions can be used when 
the analyst wants to focus on the behavior in the tails.
Although no single and uniformly accepted approach exists to address all of these 
quantitative challenges to the asset allocation exercise, a sound asset allocation process 
will do the following:
1. Adjust the observed asset class return data by unsmoothing the return series 
if the autocorrelation is significant.
2. Determine whether it is reasonable to accept an assumption of normal 
return distributions, in which case mean–variance optimization is appropri -
ate to use.
3. Allow you to choose an optimization approach that takes the tail risk into 
account if the time series exhibits fat tails and skewness and if the potential 
downside risk would exceed the levels that would be observed with a normal 
distribution.
MONTE CARLO SIMULATION
Monte Carlo simulation can be a very useful tool in asset allocation to alternative 
investments. In this section, we discuss two applications of this modeling approach. 
First, we discuss how we can simulate risk factor or asset return scenarios that exhibit 
the skewness and kurtosis commonly seen in alternative investments. Second, we 
illustrate simulation-based risk and return analytics over a long time horizon in a 
broad asset allocation context.
At a very high level, we can summarize the model construction process in the 
following steps:
1. Identify those variables that we would like to randomly generate in our 
simulation. These variables may be asset class total returns directly, or risk 
factors, depending on the model.
2. Establish the quantitative framework to generate realistic random scenarios 
for the selected asset class returns or risk factors. Here, the analyst faces 
several choices, including the following:
a. What kind of time-series model are we using? Will it be a random 
walk? Or will it incorporate serial correlations and mean-reversion-like 
characteristics?10
Monte Carlo Simulation 147
b. What kind of distribution should we assume for the shocks or innova -
tions to the variables? Is normal distribution reasonable? Or, will we use 
some fat-tailed distribution model instead?
c. Are volatilities and correlations stable over time? Or, do they vary across 
time?
3. If using a risk factor approach, convert the risk factors to asset or asset class 
returns using a factor-based model. In this reading, all our illustrations are 
based on linear factor models, but certain asset types with optionality need 
more-sophisticated models to incorporate non-linear characteristics as well.
4. Further translate realistic asset class return scenarios into meaningful indi -
cators. We can simultaneously model, for example, the investment portfolio 
and the liability of a pension fund, enabling us to assess how the funding 
ratio is expected to evolve over time. Or, in the case of an endowment fund, 
we can assess whether certain asset allocation choices would improve the 
probability of meeting the spending rate target while preserving the pur -
chasing power of the asset base.
Simulating Skewed and Fat-Tailed Financial Variables
A fairly intuitive way of incorporating non-normal returns into the analysis is to 
assume that there are two (or more) possible states of the world. Individually, each 
state can be described by using a normal distribution ( conditional normality ), but 
the combination of these two distributions will not be normally distributed.11 Next, 
we show a fairly simplified application for the public equities and government bonds. 
Note that the same approach can be applied to more asset classes as well, or it can be 
applied to risk factor changes rather than asset class returns.
For this illustration, we assume that the capital markets can be described by two 
distinct regimes—a “quiet period” (Regime 1) and a high-volatility state (Regime 2). 
Exhibit 23  shows the quarterly return history of the US equities and government 
bonds as well as the model’s more volatile regimes (the gray-shaded periods). It is 
easy to see that the Global Financial Crisis—and such earlier crisis periods as the 
1997 Asian currency contagion, the 1998 Russian ruble crisis and LTCM meltdown, 
and the 2002 tech bubble burst—all belong to the high-volatility regimes. The mean 
return and volatility statistics for the full period as well as each of the two regimes 
can be found in Exhibit 24 . Equities outperformed government bonds over the full 
observation period, and it’s interesting to see how dynamics changed between the 
quiet to the volatile periods. In the quiet period (Regime 1), equities outperformed 
bonds by around 4.6% quarterly, whereas in the volatile period (Regime 2), govern -
ment bonds outperformed equities by more than 5%. The total return volatilities 
also jumped dramatically when the market switched from quiet to volatile periods. 
In addition, the correlation between equities and bonds was near zero during the 
quiet period but turned significantly negative (about −0.6) during the volatile period. 
Finally, we estimate that the low-volatility Regime 1 prevailed 62% of the time and the 
high-volatility Regime 2 prevailed 38% of the time.
11 The estimation process of such models is beyond the scope of this reading. Readers interested in addi -
tional details are referred to Hamilton (1989)  and Kim and Nelson (1999) .
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 148
Exhibit 23: US Equities and Government Bonds Return History and 
Identification of High-Volatility Regimes
US Equities GovernmentsQuarterly Factor History
25
1520
10
5
0
–10
–15–5
–20
–25
Dec/97 Jun/01 Sep/00 Mar/04 Dec/08 Sep/1 1 Jun/14 Mar/17
High-V olatility Regime
Source : Authors’ calculations.
Exhibit 24: Return Statistics (1997–2017)
  Equities Government Bonds
Quarterly Average Return 2.1% 1.2%
Quarterly Return Volatility 8.5% 4.5%
Skewness −0.5 0.6
Kurtosis 0.4 0.4
Average Return in Regime 1 5.1% 0.5%
Average Return in Regime 2 −3.1% 2.4%
Volatility in Regime 1 5.5% 1.9%
Volatility in Regime 2 13.7% 3.8%
Correlation in Regime 1 0.0
Correlation in Regime 2 −0.6
If we want to capture only skewness and fat tails in a simulation framework, we just 
need the normal distribution parameters of the distinct regimes and the overall state 
probabilities of either Regime 1 or Regime 2. Then, the analyst would generate nor -
mally distributed random scenarios based on the different means and covariances 
estimated under the two (or more) regimes with the appropriate frequency of the 
estimated probability of being the quiet or hectic regimes. This mixture of high- and 
low-volatility normal distributions would lead to an altogether skewed and fat-tailed 
distribution of asset class return or risk factor changes. In practice, some may build a 
more dynamic, multi-step simulation model for a longer time horizon, in which case 
it’s also important to estimate the probability of switching from one regime to another.
Monte Carlo Simulation 149
Exhibit 25  shows histograms of equity returns, overlaid with the fitted normal 
distribution and the combined distributions from our regime-switching model. As the 
chart illustrates, the combination of two normal distributions improves the distribution 
fit and introduces some degree of skewness and fat-tail characteristics.
Exhibit 25: Normal and Fat-Tailed Distribution Fit for US Equity Quarterly 
Returns
–13.1 –22.6 –32.0 –3.7 5.7 15.1 24.6 34.0
Normal Distribution
Combined Low-V ol/High-V ol Normal DistrubutionsQuarterly Factor Return
18
1416
12
10
68
4
2
0
Observer ed Quarterly Return Fr equencies
Source : Authors’ calculations. 
Several variations of regime-switching models are available. We have used a very basic 
set-up to illustrate the additional richness a regime-switching model can bring to the 
analysis. We could also apply a similar approach if we were to build asset classes using 
risk factors. We could overlay the non-normal distributions of the risk factors on the 
relevant asset class returns.12
Simulation for Long-Term Horizon Risk Assessment
We will now work through a practical application of Monte Carlo simulation in the 
context of asset allocation over a long time horizon. We simulate asset class returns 
in quarterly steps over a 10-year time horizon.13 Such models exhibit some degree 
of mean-reversion and also capture dynamic interactions across risk factors or asset 
classes over multiple time periods.
The volatilities, correlations, and other parameters of the time series model are 
estimated based on the past 20 years of unsmoothed asset class return data. The 
expected returns for the selected asset classes (shown in Exhibit 26 ), however, are 
not based on historical average returns but are illustrative, forward-looking estimates. 
Note that these return expectations mostly assume passive investments in the specific 
asset class and don’t include the possible value-added from (or lost through) active 
management. Hedge funds are the exception, of course, because by definition hedge 
12 In this reading, we assume that various asset classes have constant risk factor sensitivities over time, an 
assumption that can be relaxed in practice. For example, Berkelaar, Kobor, and Kouwenberg  (2009)  present 
time-varying risk factors for various hedge fund strategies in a similar Monte Carlo simulation framework.
13 To ensure that we not only capture short-horizon risks but also properly assess long-term asset return 
behavior characteristics, we capture the linear interdependencies among multiple time series by working 
with a vector-autoregressive model.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 150
funds are actively managed investment strategies rather than a true stand-alone asset 
class. The expected returns are also generally assumed to be net of fees to make them 
comparable across asset classes.
Asset class-level expected returns are critically important to an asset allocation 
exercise. Return expectations should be reflective of the current market conditions—
including valuations, levels of interest rates, and spreads. Setting return expectations 
requires a combination of objective facts (e.g., the current yield and spread levels) 
and judgment (how risk factors and valuation ratios might change from the current 
levels over the relevant time horizon).
Exhibit 26: Asset Class Expected Returns
9
678
5
4
3
2
1
0
Cash
Government Bonds
Broad Fixed IncomeEquities
High-Y ield Cr edit
Private Real EstateCommodities
Public Real EstateHedge Funds
Private Equity
Source : Authors’ data. 
In this example, we compare three possible portfolios:
 ■A portfolio 100% invested in government bonds
 ■A portfolio allocated 50% to global public equities and 50% to broad fixed 
income
 ■A diversified “endowment portfolio” allocated 40% to global public equities, 
15% to fixed income, 20% to broad hedge funds, 15% to private equity, 5% to 
private real estate, and 5% to commodities
Exhibit 27  shows the risk and return statistics for the three portfolios. VaR and 
CVaR downside risk measures focus over the shorter, quarterly, and 1-year time 
horizons. The worst drawdown and the cumulative annualized total return ranges 
are expressed over a 10-year time horizon.
Monte Carlo Simulation 151
Exhibit 27: Portfolio Risk and Return Estimates
  Govern -
ment Bond 
Portfolio50/50 
PortfolioEndowment 
Portfolio
Expected Geometric Return over 10 Years 2.3% 5.6% 7.0%
Annual Total Return Volatility 4.2% 6.6% 11.2%
95% VaR over Q/Q (quarter over quarter) −3.1% −2.9% −4.6%
95% VaR over 1 Year −5.2% −4.2% −9.1%
95% CVaR over Q/Q −4.0% −3.9% −6.4%
95% CVaR over 1 Year −6.9% −6.6% −13.1%
99% VaR over Q/Q −4.5% −4.6% −7.5%
99% VaR over 1 Year −7.9% −8.1% −15.6%
99% CVaR over Q/Q −5.2% −5.5% −8.7%
99% CVaR over 1 Year −9.2% −10.3% −18.7%
Worst Drawdown over 10 Years −19.8% −22.5% −36.9%
10-Y ear Return DistributionGovernment 
Bond Portfolio50/50 
PortfolioEndowment 
Portfolio
5% Low 0.0% 2.3% 1.9%
25% Low 1.2% 4.2% 4.8%
50% (Median) 2.3% 5.6% 7.0%
75% High 3.1% 7.0% 9.1%
95% High 4.5% 9.0% 12.2%
 
From Exhibit 27 , we see that the multi-asset endowment portfolio generates a sig -
nificantly higher return than the portfolio exclusively invested in government bonds, 
albeit at much higher downside risk as measured by VaR, CVaR, or worst drawdown. 
This table alone, however, is insufficient to determine which investment alternative a 
particular investor should choose.
Consider the case of a university endowment fund. Let’s assume that the investment 
objective is to support a 5% annual spending rate as well as to preserve the purchasing 
power of the asset base over the 10-year time horizon. We use the same simulation 
engine to generate the analytics of Exhibit 28 . Here, we plot the expected cumulative 
total return within a +/− 1 standard deviation range together with the cumulative 
spending rate, as well as the spending rate augmented with inflation on a cumulative 
basis. The latter two variables represent the investment target, so we can meaning -
fully interpret the return potential of the two investment choices in the context of 
the investment objective. The 50% equities/50% government bond portfolio initially 
appeared to be a lower risk alternative in Exhibit 27 , but Exhibit 28  shows that this 
choice is more likely to fall short of the return target, given that its median return of 
5.6% is less than the nominal return target of approximately 7% (the 5% spending rate 
plus 2% inflation). At the same time, the endowment portfolio’s 7% median return 
indicates that it would have a better chance of meeting the investment objective.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 152
Exhibit 28: Cumulative Total Return Cones Simulated over a 10-Y ear Horizon
Cumulative ReturnA. 50/50 Portfolio
180
160
120140
100
80
4060
20
0
–20
01 0 1 2 3 7 6 8 9 5 4
Years Ahead
B. Endowment Portfolio
Cumulative Return
180
160
120140
100
80
4060
20
0
–20
01 0 1 2 3 7 6 8 9 5 4
Years Ahead
Cumulative Spending Cumulative Spending + Inflation
Exp. Cum. Return – 1 St. Dev . Expected Cumulative Return
Exp.Cum. Return + St. Dev
Exhibit 29  shows the probability of meeting the spending rate as well as the spending 
rate plus inflation at any point in time over the investment horizon. If risk is defined as 
the probability of falling short of meeting the return target (rather than the asset-only 
perspective of risk, volatility), the otherwise lower-risk 50% equities and 50% govern -
ment bond portfolio becomes the higher risk alternative.
Portfolio Optimization 153
Exhibit 29: Estimated Probability of Achieving the Investment Goal
Probability of meeting spending tar getA.
100
90
7080
60
50
3040
20
10
0
01 0 1 2 3 7 6 8 9 5 4
Years Ahead
B. 
Probability of meeting spending tar get plus inflation
100
90
7080
60
50
3040
20
10
0
01 0 1 2 3 7 6 8 9 5 4
Years Ahead
Endowment Portfolio 50/50 Portfolio
PORTFOLIO OPTIMIZATION
discuss approaches to asset allocation to alternative investments
Portfolio optimization for asset allocation has been covered in great detail in earlier 
readings. Here we focus on some special considerations for optimization in the context 
of alternative investments.11
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 154
Mean–Variance Optimization without and with Constraints
We mentioned earlier that mean–variance optimization would likely over-allocate 
to alternative, mainly illiquid, asset classes given their higher expected returns and 
potentially underestimated risk. Some investors impose minimum and maximum 
constraints on various asset classes to compensate for this bias. Let’s consider the 
ramifications of this approach.
Here, the input data for our optimization are comprised of the asset class expected 
returns depicted in Exhibit 26 , while the covariance matrix is based on the unsmoothed 
asset class return history over the past 20 years. Exhibit 30  shows the optimized 
portfolio allocations generated by the mean–variance optimization without and 
with constraints. Each column in these bar charts represents an optimized portfolio 
allocation subject to a return target. The exhibit progresses from low-return targets 
on the left to high-return targets on the right. In total, we show 20 possible portfolio 
allocations first without and then with constraints.
By reviewing Panel B of Exhibit 30 , we can see that the unconstrained portfolio 
allocations are dominated by cash and fixed income at the lower end of the risk spec -
trum, and private equity becomes the dominant asset class for higher risk portfolios. 
Optimization is quite sensitive to the input parameters: It’s quite common to see 
allocations concentrated in a small number of asset classes. Thus, investors shouldn’t 
take the unconstrained output as the “best” allocation. Small changes in the input 
variables could lead to large changes in the asset allocations.
Because investors would potentially reject the raw, concentrated output of uncon -
strained mean–variance optimization, we also ran a constrained optimization where 
we capped private equity and hedge fund allocations at 30% each, private real estate 
at 15%, and major public asset classes at 50% each. The resulting constrained allo -
cations, shown in the Panel A of Exhibit 30 , are less concentrated and appear to be 
more diversified.
Exhibit 31  depicts the mean–variance efficient frontiers corresponding to the 
optimized portfolio allocations of Exhibit 30 . Note that both frontiers contain 20 dots, 
each representing an optimized portfolio. The numbers under each bar in Exhibit 30  
identify the allocation associated with each of the dots on the efficient frontiers in 
Exhibit 31  (e.g., the allocation associated with portfolio 20 on the efficient frontier in 
Exhibit 31  is the one shown at the rightmost edge of Exhibit 30 ).
Portfolio Optimization 155
Exhibit 30: Unconstrained and Constrained Asset Allocations
Cash Equities Government Bonds Broad Fixed Income
High-Y ield Cr edit Hedge Funds Commodities
Public Real Estate Private Real Estate Private EquityA. Constrained Portfolios
100
80
60
40
20
0
1 10 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 5 6 7 8 9 2 3 4
B. Unconstrained Portfolios
100
80
60
40
20
0
1 10 16 17 18 19 20 11 12 13 14 15 5 6 7 8 9 2 3 4
Note that the constrained efficient frontier runs below its unconstrained peer ( Exhibit 
31). This is not unexpected, as we artificially prohibited the optimization from select -
ing the most efficient allocation it could get based on the available quantitative data.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 156
Exhibit 31: Unconstrained and Constrained Mean–Variance Efficient 
Frontiers
Unconstrained
ConstrainedExpected Return
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0 18 4 8 14 12 10 6 2 16
Volatility
In practice, many investors are aware of the limits of the mean–variance framework—
the possible underestimation of the true fundamental risks based on the reported 
returns of private investments—and they may also have in mind other constraints, 
such as capping illiquidity. Thus, introducing maximum and minimum constraints 
for certain asset classes may be a reasonable, although exogenous, adjustment to the 
quantitative optimization. However, not even constrained optimized allocations should 
be accepted without further scrutiny. In fact, similar volatility and expected return 
profiles can be achieved with a wide variety of asset allocations. So, although opti -
mized portfolios may serve as analytical guidance, it’s important to validate whether 
a change to an asset allocation policy results in a significant return increment and/or 
volatility reduction. Sometimes the results of a constrained optimization are largely 
driven by the constraints (especially if they are very tight). If that is the case, then 
the optimizer might not be able to perform its job due to the many (or very tight) 
constraints applied.
Mean–CVaR Optimization
Portfolio optimization can also improve the asset allocation decision through a risk 
management lens. An investor who is particularly concerned with the downside risk 
of a proposed asset allocation may choose to minimize the portfolio’s CVaR rather 
than its volatility relative to a return target.14 If the portfolio contains asset classes 
and investment strategies with negative skewness and long tails, the CVaR lens could 
materially alter the asset allocation decision. Minimizing CVaR subject to an expected 
return target is quantitatively much more complex than portfolio variance minimiza -
tion: It requires a large number of historical or simulated return scenarios to properly 
incorporate potential tail risk into the optimization.15
14 Because we are optimizing allocation to asset classes, the CVaR tail risk measure quantifies systematic  
asset class level risks. Individual asset managers or securities may impose additional idiosyncratic risk 
when the asset allocation is implemented in practice.
15 Technical details are provided by Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000) .
Portfolio Optimization 157
Our first illustration is applied to three hedge fund strategies: macro, equity market 
neutral, and long/short equity hedged. Our expected returns for the three strategies 
are 3.6%, 3.6%, and 6.0%, respectively. The observed return distribution for macro 
strategy is fairly normal, while equity market neutral exhibits negative skew and the 
highest kurtosis of these three strategies (see Exhibit 21 ).
Panels A and B of Exhibit 32  compare 20 possible portfolio allocations generated 
by the mean–variance and mean–CVaR optimizations, varying from low to high risk/
return profiles. The allocation to long/short equity hedged (the black bar) is similar 
under both the MVO and CVaR approaches. The macro strategy receives a much 
higher allocation using the CVaR approach than it does using the MVO approach.
Exhibit 32: Hedge Fund Allocations
2 4 6 14 12 16 18 10 8
21
1 4 6 14 12 16 1820
20 10 83 5 7 15 13 17 19 11 9
3 5 7 15 13 17 19 11 9AllocationA. Mean–V ariance
100
90
7080
60
50
3040
10
0
Mean–V ariance Optimized Allocations
B. Mean–CV aR 
Allocation
100
90
7080
60
50
3020
2040
10
0
Mean–CV aR Optimized Allocations
HF Macr o HF Equit y Market-Neutral HF Equit y Hed ged
Exhibit 33  compares portfolio #12 from the mean–variance efficient frontier to portfolio 
#12 from the mean–CVaR efficient frontier. Both portfolios allocated 60% to the long/
short equity strategy. Under the CVaR-optimization approach, the remaining 40% of 
the portfolio is invested in global macro. Under the MVO approach, the remaining 
40% of the portfolio is invested in equity market-neutral.
Let’s compare the portfolio volatilities and downside risk measures. The mean–
CVaR portfolio has higher volatility (7.8% vs 7.3%) but lower tail risk (−6.8% vs −7.7%). 
Exhibit 33  also shows a third portfolio, which evenly splits  the 40% not allocated to 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 158
equity-hedged between global macro and equity market neutral. The volatility of this 
portfolio lies between the two optimal portfolios. Although nominally more diversi -
fied than either of the #12 portfolios from the optimization, its CVaR is worse than 
that of the mean–CVaR optimized portfolio (but still better than that of the MVO 
portfolio). An investor may have qualitative considerations that warrant including 
this more-diversified portfolio among the options to be evaluated.
Exhibit 33: Mean–Variance and Mean–CVaR Efficient Hedge Fund Allocations
  Asset Allocation Portfolio Characteristics
 
MacroEquity 
Market 
NeutralLong/Short 
EquityExpected 
Return Volatility95% 
VaR95% 
CVaR
Mean–Variance Optimal 0.0% 40.0% 60.0% 5.0% 7.3% −3.7% −7.7%
Mean–CVaR Optimal 40.0% 0.0% 60.0% 5.0% 7.8% −4.1% −6.8%
Combination 20.0% 20.0% 60.0% 5.0% 7.5% −3.7% −7.3%
Exhibit 34  compares the optimal allocations of a broad asset class portfolio through 
the mean–variance and mean–CVaR lenses. In this example, the optimal allocations 
were selected subject to a 6.8% expected return target. Both approaches allocated 
a significant portion of the portfolio to private equity and hedge funds (30% each). 
A notable difference, however, is in the allocation to public and private real estate. 
Where the MVO approach allocated 22% to the combined real estate categories, the 
CVaR approach allocated nothing at all to either real estate category. We can identify 
the reason for this by referring back to Exhibit 21 : The public and private real estate 
categories are characterized by 99% CVaRs of −40.2% and −27.9%, respectively.
Exhibit 34: Mean–Variance and Mean–CVaR Efficient Multi-Asset Portfolios
  Asset Allocation Portfolio Characteristics
  EquitiesGovt 
BondsHedge 
FundsPublic 
Real 
EstatePrivate 
Real 
EstatePrivate 
EquityExpected 
Return Volatility99% 
CVaR
Mean–Variance 
Optimal18% 0% 30% 7% 15% 30% 6.8% 11.5% −20.7%
Mean–CVaR 
Optimal34% 6% 30% 0% 0% 30% 6.8% 12.1% −15.6%
EXAMPLE 6
Asset Allocation Recommendation
The CIO (chief investment officer) of the International University Endowment 
Fund (the Fund) is preparing for the upcoming investment committee (IC) 
meeting. The Fund’s annual asset allocation review is on the agenda, and the 
CIO plans to propose a new strategic asset allocation for the Fund. Subject to 
prudent risk-taking, the recommended asset allocation should offer
 ■the highest expected return and
Portfolio Optimization 159
 ■the highest probability of achieving the long-term 5% real return 
target.
The inflation assumption is 2%.
In addition, the risk in the Fund is one factor that is considered when lend -
ers assign a risk rating to the university. The university’s primary lender has 
proposed a loan covenant that would trigger a re-evaluation of the university’s 
creditworthiness if the Fund incurs a loss greater than 20% over any 1-year period.
The investment staff produced the following tables to help the CIO prepare 
for the meeting.
 
Alterna -
tiveAsset Allocation
CashPublic 
Equity Govt CreditHedge 
FundReal 
EstatePrivate 
Equity
A 5.0% 60.0% 30.0% 5.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
B 4.0% 50.0% 16.0% 5.0% 10.0% 5.0% 10.0%
C 2.0% 40.0% 8.0% 5.0% 18.0% 7.0% 20.0%
D 1.0% 30.0% 5.0% 4.0% 20.0% 10.0% 30.0%
E 2.0% 40.0% 3.0% 3.0% 15.0% 7.0% 30.0%
F 2.0% 50.0% 3.0% 0.0% 10.0% 5.0% 30.0%
G 1.0% 56.0% 3.0% 0.0% 10.0% 0.0% 30.0%
 
 
  Portfolio Characteristics
AlternativeExpected  
Return Volatility1-Y ear 
99%  
VaR1-Y ear 
99% 
CVaR10-Y ear Horizon:
5th Percen -
tile Return95th 
Percentile 
ReturnProbability of 
Meeting 5% 
Real ReturnProbability 
of Purchas -
ing Power 
Impairment
A 6.0% 9.0% −12.4% −15.0% 1.6% 10.5% 37.0% 7.1%
B 6.7% 10.3% −14.6% −17.3% 2.0% 11.4% 46.1% 4.3%
C 7.1% 11.1% −15.8% −18.8% 2.2% 12.2% 52.1% 3.2%
D 7.4% 11.5% −16.3% −19.4% 2.4% 12.6% 56.1% 2.5%
E 7.7% 12.3% −17.4% −20.6% 2.4% 13.2% 58.8% 2.8%
F 7.8% 13.0% −18.5% −21.8% 2.2% 13.7% 60.8% 3.6%
G 7.9% 13.5% −19.3% −22.7% 2.1% 14.1% 61.0% 4.0%
 
Notes:
 ■1-year horizon 99% VaR: the lowest return over any 1-year period at 
a 99% confidence level (i.e., only a 1% chance to experience a total 
return below this threshold).
 ■1-year horizon 99% CVaR: the expected return if the return falls below 
the 99% VaR threshold.
 ■5th and 95th percentile annualized returns over a 10-year time hori -
zon: a 90% chance that the annualized 10-year total return will fall 
between these two figures
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 160
 ■probability of purchasing power impairment16: as defined by the IC, 
the probability of losing 40% of the endowment’s purchasing power 
over 10 years after taking gifts to the endowment, spending from the 
endowment, and total return into account.
1. Which asset allocation is most likely  to meet the committee’s objective and 
constraints?
Solution:
Portfolio D. Portfolios E, F, and G have 1-year, 99% CVaRs, which, if re -
alized, would trigger the loan covenant. Portfolio D has the next highest 
probability of meeting the 5% real return target and the lowest probability 
of purchasing power impairment. Portfolios A, B, and C have lower proba -
bilities of meeting the return targets and higher probabilities of purchasing 
power impairment.
RISK FACTOR-BASED OPTIMIZATION
Increasingly, investors believe that viewing investment decisions through a risk factor 
lens (e.g., growth, inflation, credit risk) may improve the investment process. Separating 
fundamentally similar investments, like public and private equities, into distinct asset 
classes ignores the probability that both are exposed to the same risk factors. In this 
section, we will work through an asset allocation example using a risk factor lens.
Let’s assume that an investor starts the asset allocation exercise by first allocating 
the overall risk budget across the main risk factors.17 Instead of setting expectations 
for distinct asset classes, she may start thinking about the return expectations and 
correlation of the fundamental risk factors. Exhibit 35  shows her return expectations 
for the risk factors described in Exhibit 14 . In this illustration, the global equity risk 
factor (a practical proxy for macroeconomic-oriented “growth”) is expected to generate 
the highest return. She expects the duration and value factors to generate negative 
returns because stronger economic growth fueled by advances in technology would 
lead to rising rates and better returns for growth stocks. She is concerned about rising 
inflation, so she has assigned a positive expected return to the inflation factor.
16 Similar measures of risk are proposed by Swensen (2009)  in the context of endowment funds.
17 Approaches to asset allocation and portfolio construction are expanding as the understanding of risk 
factors is increasing. A risk parity approach to asset allocation, for example, would allocate total risk in 
equal portion to the selected risk factors.12
Risk Factor-Based Optimization 161
Exhibit 35: Expected Factor Returns
Exp. Factor ReturnReturns
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
–1.0
–2.0
Global
EquityLiquidity Inflation Nominal
DurationValue Size Credit
SpreadCurr ency
Using these returns and the historical factor volatilities and correlations, we can 
optimize the risk factor exposure by minimizing factor-implied risk subject to a 
total return target of 6.5%. The black bars in Exhibit 36  show these optimal factor 
exposures. Note that the target exposures of the value and nominal duration factors 
are positive, although the associated expected factor returns are negative. The model 
allocates to these factors for their diversification potential because they are negatively 
correlated with other risk factors. Duration and equity factors have a correlation of 
–0.6, whereas value and equity factors have a correlation of –0.3 based on the data 
used for this illustration.
We have established optimal risk factor exposures, so now we must implement 
this target using actual investments. Some investors may have access to only public 
market investments, while other investors may also have access to private illiquid 
investments. The gray and white bars in Exhibit 36  illustrate the two possible imple -
mentations of the target factor exposures. Portfolio 1 assumes the investor is limited 
to public market investments. Portfolio 2 uses both public market investments and 
private, illiquid investments. The portfolio allocation details are displayed in Exhibit 37 .
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 162
Exhibit 36: Optimal Risk Factor Allocations and Associated Asset Class 
Portfolios
Global
Equit yLiquidit y In/f_lation Nominal
DurationValue Size Credit
SpreadCurrency
Target F actor Allocation Portfolio 1 Portfolio 2Allocations
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Exhibit 37: Asset Class Portfolios Designed Based on Optimal Risk Factor 
Allocations
  Portfolio 1 Portfolio 2
Domestic Equities; Value Tilt 21.0% 13.0%
Non-Domestic Developed Market Equities; Value Tilt 21.0% 13.0%
Foreign Emerging Market Equities 21.0% 12.0%
Government Bonds 0.0% 5.0%
Broad Fixed Income 10.0% 0.0%
High-Yield Credit 2.0% 3.0%
Inflation-Linked Bonds 7.0% 0.0%
Hedge Funds 15.0% 10.0%
Commodities 3.0% 4.0%
Public Real Estate 0.0% 12.0%
Private Real Estate 0.0% 13.0%
Private Equity 0.0% 15.0%
Total 100.0% 100.0%
Expected Return 6.2% 6.9%
Volatility 13.5% 13.2%
Even though they have similar factor exposures, you can see some significant dif -
ferences in the asset class allocations of the two portfolios. Portfolio 1 allocates 63% 
to public equities, whereas Portfolio 2 allocates 35% to public equities plus 15% to 
private equity for its higher return potential. Portfolio 1 allocates 18% to alternatives 
(15% in hedge funds and 3% in commodities, two of the most liquid alternative asset 
classes), while Portfolio 2 has allocated 54% to alternatives (10% hedge funds, 4% 
commodities, 12% public real estate, 13% private real estate, and 15% private equity). 
Portfolio 1 achieves its inflation sensitivity by allocating to inflation-linked bonds 
Risk Factor-Based Optimization 163
and commodities. Portfolio 2 achieves its desired exposure to the inflation factor 
through a combined allocation to real estate and commodities. The volatility of the 
two portfolios is similar, but Portfolio 2 is able to achieve a higher expected return 
given its ability to allocate to private equity.
Although a risk factor-driven approach is conceptually very elegant, we must 
mention a few caveats:
 ■While generally accepted asset class definitions provide a common language 
among the investment community, risk factors may be defined quite differ -
ently investor-to-investor. It’s important to establish a common understand -
ing of factor definitions and factor return expectations among the parties to 
an asset allocation exercise. This includes an agreement as to what financial 
instruments can be used to best match the factor exposures if they are not 
directly investable.
 ■Correlations among risk factors, just like correlations across asset classes, 
may dramatically shift under changing market conditions; thus, careful test -
ing needs to be applied to understand how changing market conditions will 
affect the asset allocation.
 ■Some factor sensitivities are stable (like the nominal interest rate sensitiv -
ity of government bonds), while others are very unstable (like the inflation 
sensitivity of commodities). Factor sensitivities also need to be very carefully 
tested to validate whether the invested portfolio would truly deliver the 
desired factor exposures and not deliver unintended factor returns.
EXAMPLE 7
Selecting an Asset Allocation Approach
1. You have a new client who has unexpectedly inherited a substantial sum of 
money. The client is in his early 30s and newly married. He has no children 
and no other investible assets. What asset allocation approach is most suit -
able for this client?
Solution:
Mean–variance optimization with Monte Carlo simulation is most ap -
propriate for this client. He has limited investment expertise, so your first 
responsibility is to educate him with respect to such basic investment 
concepts as risk, return, and diversification. A simple MVO approach 
supplemented with Monte Carlo simulation to illustrate potential upside 
and downside of an asset allocation choice is mostly likely to serve the asset 
allocation and investment education needs.
2. Your client is a tax-exempt foundation that recently received a bequest dou -
bling its assets to €200 million. There is an outside investment adviser but 
no dedicated investment staff; however, the six members of the investment 
committee (IC) are all wealthy, sophisticated investors in their own right. 
The IC conducts an asset allocation study every three years and reviews 
the asset allocation at its annual meeting. The current asset allocation is 
30% equities, 20% fixed income, 25% private equity, and 25% real estate. 
Three percent of assets are paid out annually in grants; this expenditure is 
covered by an annuity purchased some years ago. The foundation’s primary 
investment objective is to maximize returns subject to a maximum level of 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 164
volatility. A secondary consideration is the desire to avoid a permanent loss 
of capital. What asset allocation approach is most suitable for this client?
Solution:
Given the sophistication and investment objectives of the IC members, 
using a mean–CVaR optimization approach is appropriate to determine the 
asset allocation. This client has a more sophisticated understanding of risk 
and will appreciate the more nuanced view of risk offered by mean–CVaR 
optimization. Given the portfolio’s exposure to alternative investments, 
the asset allocation decision will be enhanced by the more detailed picture 
of left-tail risk offered by CVaR optimization (the risk of permanent loss) 
relative to mean–variance optimization. The lack of permanent staff and a 
once-per-year meeting schedule suggest that a risk factor-based approach 
may not be appropriate.
LIQUIDITY PLANNING
discuss the importance of liquidity planning in allocating to 
alternative investments
Earlier, we addressed various aspects of liquidity associated with investing in alterna -
tive asset classes. In this section, we focus on multi-year horizon liquidity planning 
for private investments.
When managing portfolios that contain allocations to alternative investments, 
managing liquidity risk takes on critical importance. We need to ensure sufficient 
liquidity to meet interim obligations or goals, which might include:
 ■periodic payments to beneficiaries (e.g., a pension fund’s retirement ben -
efit payments or an endowment fund’s distributions to support operating 
expenses);
 ■portfolio rebalancing or funding new asset manager mandates; or
 ■fulfilling a commitment made to a private investment fund when the general 
partner makes the capital call.
Alternative investments pose unique liquidity challenges that must be explic -
itly addressed before committing to an alternative investment program. Private 
investments—including private equity, private real estate, private real assets, and 
private credit—represent the most illiquid components of an investment portfolio. 
Private investments usually require a long-term commitment over an 8- to 15-year 
time horizon. An investor contributes capital over the first few years (the investment 
period) and receives distributions in the later years. Combined with the call down 
(or drawdown) structure of a private investment fund, this creates a need to model a 
hypothetical path to achieving and maintaining a diversified, fully-invested allocation 
to private investments. Here we will explore the challenges with private investment 
liquidity planning with three primary considerations:
1. How to achieve and maintain the desired allocation.
2. How to handle capital calls.
3. How to plan for the unexpected.13
Liquidity Planning 165
Achieving and Maintaining the Strategic Asset Allocation
Strategic planning is required to determine the necessary annual commitments an 
investor should make to reach and maintain the long-term target asset allocation. Large 
private investors often use a liquidity forecasting model for their private investment 
programs. Here, we illustrate one such model based on work published by Takahashi 
and Alexander (2001) . We also discuss private investment commitment pacing as 
an application of this model. This model is only one possible way to forecast private 
investment cash flows; investors may develop their own model using their own 
assumptions and experience.
We will illustrate this model with a hypothetical capital commitment (CC) of £100 
million to a fund with a contractual term (L) of 12 years.
We begin by modeling the capital contributions (C) to the fund. Certain assump -
tions must be made regarding the rate of contribution (RC). We’ll assume that 25% 
is contributed in the first year and that 50% of the remaining commitments are con -
tributed in each of the subsequent years:
Year 1: £100 million × 25% = £25 million
Year 2: (£100 million − £25 million) × 50% = £37.5 million
Year 3: (£100 million − £25 million − £37.5 million) × 50% = £18.75 million
and so on.
The capital contribution (C) in year t can be expressed with the following formula:
 Ct = RCt × (CC − PICt) (1)
where PIC denotes the already paid-in capital.
Alternatively, we can express this in words:
 Capital Contribution  
 = Rate of Contribution  × (Capital Commitment  – Paid-in-Capital)
In practice, the investment period is often limited to a defined number of years; also, 
not all of the committed capital may be called.
The next step is to estimate the periodic distribution paid to investors. Distributions 
(D) are a function of the net asset value (NAV). From one year to the next, the NAV 
rises as additional capital contributions are made and as underlying investments 
appreciate. NAV declines as distributions are made (or as assets are written down).
If the partnership investment develops as anticipated, then the fund’s IRR would 
be equal to this rate.
To estimate the expected annual distribution payments, we need to make an 
assumption about the pattern of distributions. For example, an analyst may assume 
that the fund does not distribute any money in Year 1 or Year 2 but distributes 10% of 
the prevailing net asset value in Year 3, 20% in Year 4, 30% in Year 5, and 50% of the 
remaining balance in each of the remaining years. In the case of real estate funds, it 
is also possible that there is a pre-defined minimum annual distribution rate (called 
the “yield”). Once the annual rates of distribution are determined, the annual amount 
distributed is calculated by the following formula:
 Dt = RDt[NAVt–1 × (1 + G)]  (2)
where 
 RDt = (t/L)B, (3)
 N AVt = [NAVt–1 × (1 + G)] + Ct − Dt (4)
Again, in words:
 Distributions  at time t 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 166
 = Rate of Distribution  at time  t × [NAV at time t-1 × (1 + Growth Rate)], and
 NAV at time t 
 = prior NAV × (1 + Growth Rate) + Capital Contribution  – Distributions
In Exhibit 38 , we display the forecasted annual capital contributions, outstanding 
commitment forecast, distributions, NAV, and cumulative net cash flow for a private 
investment fund with a 12-year life. We assume that 25% of the committed capital 
is contributed in the first year and that 50% of the remaining commitments are con -
tributed in each of the subsequent years. Using a bow (B) parameter of 2.5, we set 
the RDt distribution rates such that the yearly distribution rates would increase fairly 
gradually. We assume a 13% growth rate from the investments in this fund.
Exhibit 38: Expected Annual Contribution, Outstanding Commitment, 
Rate of Distribution, Annual Distribution, NAV, and Net Cash Flow of a 
Hypothetical Private Investment Fund
Annual Contribution
40
35
2530
20
15
10
5
0
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110Outstanding Commitment
120
100
6080
40
20
0
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110
Years
Rate of Distribution
120
100
6080
40
20
0
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110Annual Distribution
80
70
5060
40
30
20
10
0Cumulative Distribution
250
200
100150
50
0
5 2918 4 06 7 31 2 1110
Years
NAV
160
140
100120
80
60
40
20
0
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110Cumulative Net CF
150
100
050
–50
–100
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110
YearsYears
Years
Years
The corresponding annual RDt rates are displayed in Exhibit 39 .
Liquidity Planning 167
Exhibit 39: Assumed Annual Distribution Rates (RDt)
Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Rate of 
Distribution0% 1% 3% 6% 11% 18% 26% 36% 49% 63% 80% 100%
How does the shape of the expected rate of distribution influence NAV and the annual 
distribution amounts? For illustration purposes we can change our assumption of RD 
by setting the bow parameter (B) to 5.0, such that early year distribution rates are 
very low and start increasing in the second half of the fund’s life. The new distribution 
rates are shown in Exhibit 40 , and Exhibit 41  shows how distributions and the NAV 
would react to this change.
Exhibit 40: Alternative Assumed Annual Distribution Rates (RDt)
Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Rate of 
Distribution0% 0% 0% 0% 1% 3% 7% 13% 24% 40% 65% 100%
Exhibit 41: Rate of Distribution, Expected Annual Distribution, NAV, and 
Cumulative Net Cash Flow with Back-Loaded Distributions
Rate of Distribution
120
100
6080
40
20
0
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110
Years
NAV
160
100120140
6080
40
20
0
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110
YearsCumulative Net CF
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
5 2 9 1 8 4 0 67 3 121110
YearsAnnual Distribution
80
70
5060
40
30
20
10
0Cumulative Distribution
250
200
100150
50
0
5 2 9 18 4 06 7 31 2 1110
Years
Although the annual capital contributions would not be affected, we can see that 
the lower distribution rate in the early years allows the NAV to grow higher. The 
cumulative net cash flow, however, would stay in the negative zone for a longer time.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 168
EXAMPLE 8
Liquidity Planning for Private Investments
1. The NAV of an investor’s share in a private renewable energy fund was €30 
million at the end of 2020. All capital has been called. The investor expects 
a 20% distribution to be paid at the end of 2021. The expected growth rate is 
12%. What is the expected NAV at year-end 2022?
Solution:
The expected NAV at year-end 2022 is €30,105,600. The expected distri -
bution at the end of 2021 is €6.72 million [(€30 million x 1.12) x 20%]. The 
NAV at year-end 2022 is therefore (€30 million x 1.12) x (1 − 0.20) x 1.12 = 
€30,105,600.
An important practical application of such models is to help determine the size 
of the annual commitment an investor needs to make to reach the target allocation 
of an asset class over the coming years (i.e., investment commitment pacing).
Assume that we manage an investment portfolio of £1 billion and that our stra -
tegic asset allocation target for private equities is 20%. We currently do not have any 
private equity investment in the portfolio. We also must project the growth of the 
aggregate investment portfolio, because we want to achieve the 20% allocation based 
on the expected future  value of the portfolio and of the private equity investment, not 
today’s value. We assume an aggregate portfolio growth rate of 6% per year, including 
both net contributions and investment returns.
With these assumptions, and the private investment cash flow and NAV forecast -
ing model discussed previously, the investor can determine the annual commitments 
needed to reach the overall target allocation. By using the same cash flow forecasting 
parameters as for the analysis in Exhibit 38 , we can see that a £100 million commit -
ment would lead the NAV to peak at around £110 million five years from now. A 
rough approximation could be the following: In five years, the total portfolio size 
would be £1 billion × 1.065 ≈ £1.338 billion; so, at that point, the total private equity 
NAV should be approximately 20% × £1.338 billion=£268 million. Since we know 
that a £100 million commitment would lead to an NAV of £110 million in five years, 
we can extrapolate to arrive at the conclusion that a £243 million commitment today 
could achieve the goal.
However, this would result in a very concentrated private equity investment, with 
an NAV peaking in four to five years and then declining over the following years as 
distributions are made. A better practice is to spread commitments out over multiple 
years. A stable and disciplined multi-year commitment schedule leads to a more stable 
NAV size over time. It also achieves an important objective of diversifying exposure 
across vintage years. Thus, an investor can choose to commit a target amount of 
around £70 million per year over a period of four years (2017 through 2020) instead 
of concentrating the commitment in a single year. This schedule would bring the total 
private equity NAV to the target 20% level over five years. In Exhibit 42 , we illustrate 
how the portfolio of private equity investments of different vintage years would build 
up over time. We also show how the total NAV would evolve beyond 2022 if no fur -
ther capital commitment is made. As the chart suggests, the NAV would continue to 
grow through 2023 but would start to decline in later years as the 2017–2020 vintage 
private funds make distributions.
Liquidity Planning 169
Exhibit 42: Commitment Pacing: Cumulative NAV of Private Equity 
Investments
18 19 20 22 24 25 21 23
2017 Commit 2018 Commit 2019 Commit 2020 CommitTotal NA V of Private Equity Pr ogram
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
17
In Exhibit 43 , we show how private equity investments would grow as a proportion 
of the overall investment portfolio. As in the previous chart, we extend the forecast 
beyond 2022 to show the proportion of private equity investments will start to decline 
without further capital commitments after 2020.
Exhibit 43: Commitment Pacing: Private Equity NAV as % of the Total 
Portfolio
Private Equity as % of T otal PortfolioPortfolio Size Private Equity NA VAssets
1,800
1,600
1,2001,400
1,000
800
600
400
200
0Private Equity (%)
25.0
20.0
10.015.0
5.0
0
19 18 21 20 23 22 25 24 17
The investor must review her pacing model forecast periodically, updating it as needed 
based on the actual commitments and transactions that have occurred and refreshing 
the assumptions for the future. If the investor plans to maintain a 20% allocation to 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 170
private equity investments over the long run, she will clearly have to make ongoing 
commitments in the future, although at a slower pace once private equity is an estab -
lished asset class in the portfolio. 
To summarize, cash flow and pacing models enable investors to better manage 
their portfolio liquidity, set realistic annual commitment targets to reach the desired 
asset allocation, and manage portfolio beta in aggregate. Investors need to validate 
their model assumptions and evaluate how different parameter settings and liquidity 
stress scenarios could impact their investment portfolios.
PREPARING FOR THE UNEXPECTED
discuss the importance of liquidity planning in allocating to 
alternative investments
The investor makes an up-front commitment of a certain dollar amount to a private 
investment fund, and the funds will typically be called (paid in) over a period of three 
to four years. In many cases, the general partner (GP) will never call the full amount 
of the capital commitment. The limited partner (LP) is obligated to pay the capital call 
in accordance with the terms agreed to with the GP , often within 30 days of receiving 
the call notification. However, it is not practical to keep all the committed (but not yet 
called) capital in liquid reserves given the opportunity cost of being out of the markets 
during the investment phase. Investors must develop a strategy for maintaining the 
asset allocation while waiting for the fund to become fully invested. Capital pending 
investment in a private equity fund is often invested in public equities as a proxy for 
private equities. A similar approach may be followed in the case of other private asset 
classes: The investor may consider high yield as a placeholder for pending private credit 
investments, REITs as a placeholder for private real estate investments, and energy 
stocks or commodity futures as a proxy for private real asset investments.
Preparing for the Unexpected
The liquidity-planning model described here addresses the key components of cash 
inflows and outflows, but the model results are clearly heavily dependent on the 
assumptions. The model parameters can be based purely on judgment, but a better 
practice would be to verify estimates and forecasts with a sample of representative 
private funds’ historical experience. Obviously, the realized cash flows in the future 
are likely to differ from what the model predicted based on the assumed parameters. 
Thus, it is advisable to run the analysis using different sets of assumptions and under 
different scenarios. In a bear market, GPs may call capital at a higher pace and/or 
make distributions at a slower pace than had been expected. This suggests that in 
addition to the base case scenario planning, the analyst should develop an additional 
set of assumptions with faster capital calls and lower distribution rates.
If the fund is scheduled to begin liquidation when the investor’s public market 
portfolio is performing poorly (as it did in the 2007–2008 period), it is likely that the 
GP will exercise his option to extend the fund life. If this happens, investors may find 
themselves with an asset allocation significantly different from target or being unable 
to meet the capital calls that were intended to be funded from the distributions. These 
contingencies should be modeled as part of stress testing the asset allocation.14
Preparing for the Unexpected 171
EXAMPLE 9
Private Investments, Asset Allocation, and Liquidity 
Planning
The Endowment Fund of the University of Guitan (the Fund) has $750 million 
in assets. The investment committee (IC) adopted the following strategic asset 
allocation four years ago. Private investments are at the lower end of the permitted 
range. To reach the target allocation among private investments, the investment 
team has made several new commitments recently, and they expect capital calls 
over the coming year equal to approximately about 20% of the current private 
asset net asset value.
 
 
Strategic Asset Allocation 
Target Permitted RangeCurrent Asset Allocation
(%) ($mil)
Cash 2% 0 to 5% 3% 22.5
Public Equities (including long/short 
equity)35% 30 to 40% 35% 262.5
Government Bonds 5% 4 to 10% 7% 52.5
High-Yield Credit 3% 2 to 5% 5% 37.5
Hedge Funds (excluding long/short 
equity)20% 17 to 23% 23% 172.5
Private Real Estate 10% 7 to 13% 8% 60.0
Private Real Assets 5% 3 to 7% 4% 30.0
Private Equity 20% 15 to 22% 15% 112.5
Total       $750 mil
Expected Return 7.1%  
Expected Volatility 11.1%
99% CVaR −18.8%
Assumed Inflation Rate 2%
 
The strategic asset allocation has a 52% probability of meeting the 5% real 
return target (4% spend rate, 1% principal growth, and 2% inflation).
At its last meeting, the endowment committee of the board approved a 
temporary increase in the spending rate, raising it from 4% to 5% for the next 
five years to support the university’s efforts to reposition itself in the face of 
declining enrollments. The spending rate is calculated as a percentage of the 
Fund’s trailing 5-year average value.
The CIO (chief investment officer) has produced a capital market outlook 
that will guide the fund’s tactical asset allocation strategy for the next several 
quarters. Key elements of the outlook are:
 ■accommodative central bank policies are ending;
 ■equity valuation metrics have recently set new highs;
 ■the economic cycle is at or near its peak (i.e., there is a meaningful 
probability of rising inflation and a weaker economic environment 
over the next several quarters); and
 ■returns will quite likely be lower than what has been experienced over 
the past five years.
She also developed the following stress scenario based on her capital market 
outlook:
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 172
 
Return Stress Scenario
Cash 2%
Public Equities (including l/s equity) −30%
Government Bonds −3%
High-Yield Credit −10%
Hedge Funds (excluding l/s equity) −8%
Private Real Estate 0%
Private Real Assets 10%
Private Equity −10%
 
1. Identify and discuss the liquidity factors that the CIO should consider as she 
develops her portfolio positioning strategy for the next 12 to 24 months.
Solution:
 ■Given the market outlook, it is reasonable to assume cash flows into 
the fund from existing private investments will be negligible.
 ■The fund has next-12-month liabilities as follows:
 ●Approximately $37.5 million to the university ($750 million x 5%). 
This is a high (conservative) estimate based on an assumption that 
the trailing 5-year average Fund value is less than the current $750 
million.
 ●Approximately $40.5 million in capital calls from private invest -
ment commitments (equally allocated across private real estate, 
private real assets, and private equity
 [($60m + $30m + $112.5m) × 20%]
 ●Total liabilities next 12 months = $78 million
 ■Sources of immediate liquidity:
 ●Cash = $22.5 million
 ●Government bonds are at the midpoint of the permitted range. The 
allocation could be reduced from 7% to 4% and remain within the 
permitted range. This would free up $22.5 million ($750 million 
x 3%) of immediate liquidity. However, if the return scenario is 
realized (government bonds down 3%), then the government bond 
allocation will fall below the 4% minimum and additional rebalanc -
ing will be required.
 ●$75.0 million in total (less than the $78 million liability)
 ■Other liquidity:
 ●Public equities are at the midpoint of the permitted range. The 
allocation could be reduced from 35% to 30% and remain within 
the permitted range. This would free up $37.5 million ($750 million 
× 5%) for reinvestment in more-defensive asset classes or to meet 
anticipated liquidity needs. However, if the return scenario is real -
ized (equities down 30%), then the equity allocation will fall below 
the 30% minimum and additional rebalancing will be required.
Preparing for the Unexpected 173
 ●High-yield credit is at the upper end of the allowed range. The allo -
cation could be reduced from the current 5% to 2% or 3%, freeing 
up an additional $15 to $22.5 million. The limited liquidity in high-
yield bond markets may make this challenging.
 ●The hedge fund allocation is at the upper end of the allowed 
range. The allocation could be reduced from the current 23% to 
something in the range of 17% to 20% (between the lower end of 
the band and the target allocation). However, given the required 
redemption notice (generally 60 to 90 days in advance of the 
redemption date), if the market weakens the hedge funds might 
invoke any gates allowed for in their documents.
 ■Longer term, a temporary increase in the spending rate reduces the 
probability that the fund will meet its real return target. This objective 
would be further threatened if the inflation rate does rise as the CIO 
fears. The liquidity profile of the Fund’s investments should prepare for 
the possibility that, in a bad year, they may be called upon to dip into 
capital to fund the spending obligation.
2. Recommend and justify a tactical asset allocation strategy for the Fund.
Solution:
 ■The Fund should target the upper end of the ranges for cash and gov -
ernment bonds in light of the current high equity valuations, weak -
ening economic outlook, and threat of rising inflation. Given rising 
inflation and interest rate concerns, she may also consider shortening 
the duration of the government bond portfolio.
 ■The higher cash and bond allocation will also provide the liquidity 
buffer needed to meet the Fund’s liabilities. Additional cash might be 
justified to fund the known payouts.
 ■A high allocation to real estate could also be considered a defensive 
positioning, but the current 8% allocation may rise toward its 13% 
maximum, even without additional allocations, given the expected 
decline in the balance of the portfolio. In addition, tactical tilts in 
private asset classes are difficult to implement because it would take 
an extended time period to make new commitments and invest the 
additional capital.
 ■The allocations to public equites and hedge funds could be reduced to 
fund the increases in cash and government bonds.
The following table summarizes the proposed allocation and looks at the 
likely end-of-year allocations if events unfold as forecast.
 
 
Allowed Ranges
Current 
AllocationProposed Allocation
Expected Return 
Next 12 MonthsAllocation 12 Months 
Forward
Lower 
LimitUpper 
Limit % $ (mil) % $ (mil)
Cash 0% 5% 3% 10% 75 2%   0*
Public 
Equities30% 40% 35% 30% 225 −30% 25% 157.50
Government 
Bonds4% 10% 7% 10% 75 −3% 12% 72.75
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 174
 
Allowed Ranges
Current 
AllocationProposed Allocation
Expected Return 
Next 12 MonthsAllocation 12 Months 
Forward
Lower 
LimitUpper 
Limit % $ (mil) % $ (mil)
High-Yield 
Credit2% 5% 5% 5% 37.5 −10% 5% 33.75
Hedge Funds 17% 23% 23% 17% 127.5 −8% 19% 117.30
Private Real 
Estate7% 13% 8% 8% 60 0% 12% 72.00
Private Real 
Assets3% 7% 4% 5% 37.5 10% 8% 48.75
Private 
Equity15% 22% 15% 15% 112.5 −10% 20% 123.75
Total       100% $750.0   100% $625.80
 
* Cash paid to fund liabilities ($37.5 million to the university and $40.5 million to fund private 
investment capital calls. Additional cash needs funded from government bond portfolio.
MONITORING THE INVESTMENT PROGRAM
discuss considerations in monitoring alternative investment 
programs
The monitoring of an alternative investment program is time and labor intensive. Data 
are hard to come by and are not standardized among managers or asset classes. The 
analyst must spend a good amount of time gathering data and ensuring that the analysis 
is comparable across managers and asset classes. It is incumbent on the investor to 
both monitor the managers and the alternative investment program’s progress toward 
the goals that were the basis for the investment in these assets.
Overall Investment Program Monitoring
When an investor makes a strategic decision to invest in alternative assets, spe -
cific goals are typically associated with the alternative investment program—return 
enhancement, income, risk reduction, safety, or a combination of the four. The goals 
may vary by asset class. A real estate program, for example, might be undertaken with 
the objective of replacing a portion of the fixed-income allocation—providing yield or 
income but also providing some measure of growth and/or inflation protection. The 
real estate program should be monitored relative to those goals, not simply relative 
to a benchmark.
We know that an alternative investment program is likely to take a number of 
years to reach fully-invested status. Is it reasonable to defer an assessment of the 
program until that point? Probably not. The investor must monitor developments in 
the relevant markets to ensure that the fundamental thesis underlying the decision 
to invest remains intact. Continuing with our real estate analogy, if real estate cap 15
Monitoring the Investment Program 175
rates18 fall to never-before-seen lows, what are the implications for the real estate’s 
ability to continue to fulfill its intended role in the portfolio? Or if the managers hired 
within the real estate allocation allocate more to commercial office properties than 
was anticipated, what are the implications for the ability of real estate to fulfill the 
income-oriented goal? Only by monitoring the development of the portfolio(s) will 
the investor be able to adjust course and ensure that the allocation remains on track 
to achieve the goals established at the outset.
We also know that investor goals and objectives are subject to change. Perhaps a 
university experiences a persistent decline in enrollments and the endowment fund 
will be called upon to provide greater support to the university while it transitions 
to the new reality; what are the implications for a private equity program? Or what if 
the primary wage-earner in a two-parent household becomes critically ill; how might 
this affect the asset allocation? These types of events cannot be predicted, but it is 
important to continuously monitor the linkages between the asset allocation and the 
investor’s goals, objectives, and circumstances. Particularly in the private markets—
where changing course requires a long lead time and abruptly terminating an invest -
ment program can radically alter the risk and return profile of the portfolio—an early 
warning of an impending change can greatly improve the investor’s ability to maintain 
the integrity of the investment program.
Performance Evaluation
Properly benchmarking an alternative investment strategy is a challenge that has 
important implications for judging the effectiveness of the alternative investment 
program. Many investors resort to custom index proxies (e.g., a static return pre -
mium over cash or equity index) or rely on peer group comparisons (e.g., Hedge Fund 
Research, Inc., Eurekahedge, Cambridge Private Equity Index). Both approaches have 
significant limitations.
Consider a private equity program benchmarked to the MSCI World Index plus 3%. 
This custom index may help frame the return expectation the investment committee 
holds with regard to its private equity assets, but it is unlikely to match the realized 
risk, return, and liquidity characteristics of the actual private equity program.
It is similarly challenging to develop a peer group representative of a manager’s 
strategy given the high level of idiosyncratic risk inherent in most alternative investment 
funds. Existing providers follow vastly different rules in constructing these “bench -
marks. ” They all have their own set of definitions (e.g., whether a fund is a credit fund 
or an event-driven fund), weighting methodology (asset weighted or equal weighted), 
method for dealing with potential survivorship bias, and other rules for inclusion (e.g., 
whether the fund is currently open or closed to new capital).
Exhibit 44  shows the returns from three different hedge fund index providers. An 
event driven fund that generated a 6% return over the relevant 5-year period might 
look attractive if evaluated relative to the Credit Suisse index, whereas it might look 
subpar if evaluated relative to the Eurekahedge index. Additionally, a manager’s 
ranking within the peer group is affected as much by what other  managers do as by 
his own actions. Clearly, peer group ranking is, at best, one small part of the overall 
benchmarking exercise.
18 The ratio of net operating income (NOI) to property asset value (the inverse of price/earnings).
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 176
Exhibit 44: The Trouble with Peer Groups
Strategy Provider3-Y ear Annual -
ized Return (%)5-Y ear Annualized 
Return (%)
ending December 31, 2017
Equity Hedge HFRI 5.7 6.6
  Credit Suisse 4.3 7.1
  Eurekahedge 6.5 7.8
Event-Driven HFRI 3.8 5.9
  Credit Suisse 0.8 3.7
  Eurekahedge 6.8 7.2
Global Macro HFRI 0.6 0.7
  Credit Suisse 2.0 2.7
  Eurekahedge −0.1 1.2
The timing and nature of reported alternative investment returns also pose challenges 
to monitoring the performance of alternative investment managers. For call-down 
strategies such as private equity, private real estate, and real assets, tracking and 
calculating performance might require different systems and methodologies. Private 
equity, credit, and real estate returns are typically reported using internal rates of 
return (IRRs) rather than time-weighted returns (TWR) as is common in the liquid 
asset classes. IRRs are sensitive to the timing of cash flows into and out of the fund. 
Two managers may have similar portfolios but very different return profiles depending 
on their particular capital call and distribution schedule. Investors have to be wise to 
the ways in which a manager can bias their reported IRR. Alternative metrics, such 
as multiple on invested capital (MOIC) have been developed to provide an additional 
frame of reference. (MOIC is a private equity measure that divides the current value of 
the underlying companies plus any distributions received by the total invested capital.)
Pricing issues also complicate performance evaluation of most alternative strategies. 
Stale pricing common in many alternative strategies can distort reported returns and 
the associated risk metrics. Betas, correlations, Sharpe ratios, and other measures 
must be interpreted with a healthy degree of skepticism.
Although performance measurement has its challenges with all asset classes, relying 
exclusively on any single measure with alternative investments increases the likelihood 
of inaccurate or misleading conclusions. With respect to the more illiquid investment 
strategies, judgment as to whether a given fund is meeting its investment objectives 
should be reserved until most or even all of the investments have been monetized, 
and capital has been returned to the investor. If capital is returned quickly (thereby 
possibly producing extraordinarily high IRRs), the investor may want to put greater 
emphasis on the MOIC measure. Similarly, funds that return capital more slowly than 
expected might want to put greater weight on the IRR measure. Even a fund with both a 
weak MOIC and a weak IRR need the measures to be put into context. An appropriate 
peer group analysis can help ascertain whether the “poor” performance was common 
across all funds of similar vintage (perhaps suggesting a poor investment climate) or 
whether it was specific to that fund. Likewise, a fund that posts strong performance 
may simply have benefited from an ideal investment period.
Perhaps the best way to gain performance insight beyond the numbers is to 
develop a qualitative understanding of the underlying assets. What are the manager’s 
expectations at the time of acquisition? How does the manager plan to add value to 
the investment over the holding period? What is the manager’s exit strategy for the 
investment? The investor can monitor how the investment develops relative to the 
Monitoring the Investment Program 177
initial thesis. This type of qualitative assessment can lead to a better understanding of 
whether the manager did well for the right reasons, whether the manager was wrong 
but for the right reasons, or whether the manager was just wrong.
Monitoring the Firm and the Investment Process
In addition to monitoring the portfolio, monitoring of the investment process and the 
investment management firm itself are particularly important in alternative investment 
structures where the manager cannot be terminated easily, and the assets transferred 
to another manager in which the investor has more confidence. What follows is a 
non-exhaustive list of issues that the investor will want to monitor:
 ■Key person risk : Most alternative investment strategies depend to a large 
extent on the skill of a few key investment professionals. These are what 
are known as “key persons. ” Key persons are typically specified in the fund 
documents, with certain rights allocated to the limited partners in the event 
a key person leaves the firm. It is important to ensure that these investment 
professionals remain actively involved in the investment process. There are 
also other employees of the investment manager whose departure may neg -
atively affect the operation of the business or signal an underlying problem. 
If, for example, the chief operating officer or chief compliance officer leaves 
the firm, it is important to understand why and what effect it may have on 
the business. Finally, it is important to note that for quantitatively oriented 
strategies, key person risk is often reduced because the quantitative invest -
ment process remains in place even if a key person leaves.
 ■Alignment of interests : Alignment of interest issues range from the complex -
ity of the organization, structure of management fees, compensation of the 
investment professionals, growth in assets under management (AUM), and 
the amount of capital the key professionals have committed to the funds 
that they are managing. The investor will want to verify that the money 
manager’s interests remain closely aligned with their own. Has the manager 
withdrawn a significant portion of her own capital that had been invested 
alongside the limited partners? If so, why? Is the manager raising a new 
fund? If so, what safeguards are in place to ensure that the investment pro -
fessionals are not unduly distracted with fundraising, firm administration, or 
unfairly concentrated on managing other funds? Is the opportunity set deep 
enough to support the additional capital being raised? Will the funds have 
shared ownership interest in a given asset? If so, what conflicts of interest 
may arise (e.g., the manager may earn an incentive fee in one fund if the 
asset is sold, while it may be in the best interest of the second fund to sell 
the asset at a later date).
 ■Style drift : Fund documents often give managers wide latitude as to their 
investment options and parameters, but it is incumbent on the investor to 
understand where the fund manager has a competitive advantage and skill 
and confirm that the investments being made are consistent with the man -
ager’s edge.
 ■Risk management : The investor should understand the manager’s risk man -
agement philosophy and processes and periodically confirm that the fund 
is abiding by them. Where a fund makes extensive use of leverage, a robust 
risk management framework is essential.
 ■Client/asset turnover : A critical part of the ongoing due diligence process 
should include a review of clients and assets. A significant gain or drop in 
either may be a sign of an underlying problem. An unusual gain in assets 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 178
could make it difficult for the investment professionals to invest in suit -
ably attractive investments, potentially handicapping future performance. 
Conversely, significant client redemptions may force the money manager to 
sell attractive assets as he looks to raise cash. If this occurs during periods of 
market turmoil when liquidity in the market itself may be low, the manager 
may be forced to sell what he can rather than what he should in order to 
optimize performance. This could hurt the returns of non-redeeming clients 
and/or leave the remaining clients with illiquid holdings that might make it 
difficult for them to redeem in the future.
 ■Client profile : Investors will want to gauge the profile of the fund manager’s 
other clients. Are the fund’s other clients considered long-term investors, 
or do they have a history of redeeming at the first sign of trouble? Are they 
new to the alternative investment space and perhaps don’t understand the 
nuances of the fund’s strategy and risks? You may have a strong conviction 
in a money manager’s skills, but the actions of others may affect your ability 
to reap the benefits of those skills. If too many of her other clients elect to 
redeem, the manager may invoke the gates allowed by the fund’s documents 
or, at the extreme, liquidate the fund at what might be the worst possible 
moment. This was a common occurrence during 2008–2009, when investors 
sought to raise cash by redeeming from their more liquid fund managers. 
Even if a money manager weathers massive outflows, profitability and the 
ability to retain key talent may be at risk.
 ■Service providers:  Investors will want to ensure that the fund manager has 
engaged independent and reputable third-party service providers, including 
administrators, custodians, and auditors. Although an investor may have 
performed extensive checks prior to investing, it is good practice to periodi -
cally verify that these relationships are intact and working well. If the service 
provider changes, the investor will want to understand why. Has the fund’s 
AUM grown to a level that cannot be handled adequately by the current 
provider? Perhaps the service provider has chosen to terminate the relation -
ship because of actions taken by the fund manager. Exploring the motiva -
tion behind a change in a service provider can uncover early warning flags 
deserving of further investigation.
EXAMPLE 10
Monitoring Alternative Investment Programs
1. The O’Hara family office determined that the illiquidity risk inherent in pri -
vate investments is a risk that the family is ill-suited to bear. As a result, they 
decided several years ago to unwind their private equity program. There 
are still a few remaining assets in the portfolio. The CIO (chief investment 
officer) notices that the private equity portfolio has delivered outstanding 
performance lately, especially relative to other asset classes. He presents the 
data to his research staff and wants to revisit their decision to stop making 
new private equity investments. Explain why the investment results that 
prompted the CIO’s comments should not be relied upon.
Solution:
With small, residual holdings, even a modest change in valuation can result 
in outsized returns; for example, a $2,000 investment that gets revalued to 
$3,000 would report a nominal return of 50%. The 50% return is not repre -
sentative of private equity investment as a whole but is merely an artifact 
Monitoring the Investment Program 179
of the unwinding process. A more accurate picture of performance must 
consider the development of the fund IRR over time and consider other 
performance measures, such as the MOIC.
2. The ZeeZaw family office has been invested in the Warriors Fund, a rela -
tively small distressed debt strategy, which has performed very well for a 
number of years. In a recent conversation with the portfolio manager, the 
CIO for ZeeZaw discovered that the Warriors fund will be receiving a sig -
nificant investment from a large institution within the next few weeks. What 
are some of the risks that might develop with the Warriors Fund as a result 
of this new client? What are some other issues that the CIO might want to 
probe with the Warriors Fund?
Solution:
The CIO should investigate whether the fund manager is able to appropri -
ately deploy this new capital consistent with the investment process and 
types of investments that contributed to the Warriors Fund success. Be -
cause the fund was relatively small, a very large influx of capital might force 
the portfolio manager to make larger investments than is optimal or more 
investments than they did before. Either change without the appropriate re -
sources could undermine future success. Finally, a large influx of cash could 
dilute near-term performance, especially if the funds remain undeployed for 
a significant period of time.
SUMMARY
 ■Allocations to alternatives are believed to increase a portfolio’s risk-adjusted 
return. An investment in alternatives typically fulfills one or more of four 
roles in an investor’s portfolio: capital growth, income generation, risk diver -
sification, and/or safety.
 ■Private equity investments are generally viewed as return enhancers in a 
portfolio of traditional assets.
 ■Long/short equity strategies are generally believed to deliver equity-like 
returns with less than full exposure to the equity premium. Short-biased 
equity strategies are expected to lower a portfolio’s overall equity beta while 
producing some measure of alpha. Arbitrage and event-driven strategies 
are expected to provide equity-like returns with little to no correlation with 
traditional asset classes.
 ■Real assets (e.g., commodities, farmland, timber, energy, and infrastructure 
assets) are generally perceived to provide a hedge against inflation.
 ■Timber investments provide both growth and inflation-hedging properties.
 ■Commodities (e.g., metals, energy, livestock, and agricultural commodi -
ties) serve as a hedge against inflation and provide a differentiated source 
of alpha. Certain commodity investments serve as safe havens in times of 
crisis.
 ■Farmland investing may have a commodity-like profile or a commercial 
real-estate-like profile.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 180
 ■Energy investments are generally considered a real asset as the investor 
owns the mineral rights to commodities that are correlated with inflation 
factors.
 ■Infrastructure investments tend to generate stable/modestly growing income 
and to have high correlation with overall inflation.
 ■Real estate strategies range from core to opportunistic and are believed to 
provide protection against unanticipated increases in inflation. Core real 
estate strategies are more income-oriented, while opportunistic strategies 
rely more heavily on capital appreciation.
 ■Bonds have been a more effective volatility mitigator than alternatives over 
shorter time horizons.
 ■The traditional approaches to defining asset classes are easy to communicate 
and implement. However, they tend to over-estimate portfolio diversifica -
tion and obscure primary drivers of risk.
 ■Typical risk factors applied to alternative investments include equity, size, 
value, liquidity, duration, inflation, credit spread, and currency. A benefit of 
the risk factor approach is that every asset class can be described using the 
same framework.
 ■Risk factor-based approaches have certain limitations. A framework with 
too many factors is difficult to administer and interpret, but too small a set 
of risk factors may not accurately describe the characteristics of alternative 
asset classes. Risk factor sensitivities are highly sensitive to the historical 
look-back period.
 ■Investors with less than a 15-year investment horizon should generally 
avoid investments in private real estate, private real asset, and private equity 
funds.
 ■Investors must consider whether they have the necessary skills, exper -
tise, and resources to build an alternative investment program internally. 
Investors without a strong governance program are less likely to develop a 
successful alternative investment program.
 ■Reporting for alternative funds is often less transparent than investors 
are accustomed to seeing on their stock and bond portfolios. For many 
illiquid strategies, reporting is often received well past typical monthly or 
quarter-end deadlines. Full, position-level transparency is rare in many 
alternative strategies.
 ■Three primary approaches are used to determine the desired allocation to 
the alternative asset classes:
 ●Monte Carlo simulation may be used to generate return scenarios that 
relax the assumption of normally distributed returns.
 ●Optimization techniques, which incorporate downside risk or take into 
account skew, may be used to enhance the asset allocation process.
 ●Risk factor-based approaches to alternative asset allocation can be 
applied to develop more robust asset allocation proposals.
 ■Two key analytical challenges in modelling allocations to alternatives 
include stale and/or artificially smoothed returns and return distributions 
that exhibit significant skewness and fat tails (or excess kurtosis).
 ■Artificially smoothed returns can be detected by testing the return stream 
for serial correlation. The analyst needs to unsmooth the returns to get a 
more accurate representation of the risk and return characteristics of the 
asset class.
Monitoring the Investment Program 181
 ■Skewness and kurtosis can be dealt with by using empirically observed asset 
returns because they incorporate the actual distribution. Advanced mathe -
matical or statistical models can also be used to capture the true behavior of 
alternative asset classes.
 ■Applications of Monte Carlo simulation in allocating to alternative invest -
ments include:
1. simulating skewed and fat-tailed financial variables by estimating the 
behavior of factors and/or assets in low-volatility regimes and high-vol -
atility regimes, then generating scenarios using the different means and 
covariances estimated under the different regimes; and
2. simulating portfolio outcomes (+/− 1 standard deviation) to estimate the 
likelihood of falling short of the investment objectives.
 ■Unconstrained mean–variance optimization (MVO) often leads to portfo -
lios dominated by cash and fixed income at the low-risk end of the spectrum 
and by private equity at the high-risk end of the spectrum. Some inves -
tors impose minimum and maximum constraints on asset classes. Slight 
changes in the input variables could lead to substantial changes in the asset 
allocations.
 ■Mean–CVaR optimization may be used to identify allocations that minimize 
downside risk rather than simply volatility.
 ■Investors may choose to optimize allocations to risk factors rather than 
asset classes. These allocations, however, must be implemented using asset 
classes. Portfolios with similar risk factor exposures can have vastly different 
asset allocations.
 ■Some caveats with respect to risk factor-based allocations are that investors 
may hold different definitions for a given risk factor, correlations among risk 
factors may shift under changing market conditions, and some factor sensi -
tivities are very unstable.
 ■Cash flow and commitment-pacing models enable investors in private 
alternatives to better manage their portfolio liquidity and set realistic annual 
commitment targets to reach the desired asset allocation.
 ■An alternative investment program should be monitored relative to the 
goals established for the alternative investment program, not simply relative 
to a benchmark. The investor must monitor developments in the relevant 
markets to ensure that the fundamental thesis underlying the decision to 
invest remains intact.
 ■Two common benchmarking approaches to benchmarking alternative 
investments—custom index proxies and peer group comparisons—have 
significant limitations.
 ■IRRs are sensitive to the timing of cash flows into and out of the fund: Two 
managers may have similar portfolios but different return profiles depending 
on their capital call and distribution schedule.
 ■Pricing issues can distort reported returns and the associated risk metrics, 
such as betas, correlations, and Sharpe ratios.
 ■Monitoring of the firm and the investment process are particularly import -
ant in alternative investment structures where the manager cannot be ter -
minated easily. Key elements to monitor include key person risk, alignment 
of interests, style drift, risk management, client/asset turnover, client profile, 
and service providers.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 182
REFERENCES
Ang, A. 2014. Asset Management: A Systematic Approach to Factor Investing . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199959327.001.0001
Berkelaar, A. B., A. Kobor, and R. R. P . Kouwenberg. 2009. “ Asset Allocation for Hedge Fund 
Strategies: How to Better Manage Tail Risk. ” In The VaR Modeling Handbook: Practical 
Applications in Alternative Investing, Banking, Insurance, and Portfolio Management , ed. 
Gregoriou, Greg N. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hamilton, J. D. 1989. “ A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series 
and the Business Cycle. ” Econometrica  57 (2): 357–84. 10.2307/1912559
Ivashina, Victoria and Josh Lerner. 2018. “Looking for Alternatives: Pension Investments around 
the World, 2008 to 2017. ” Federal Reserve of Boston conference paper.
Kim, C. and C. R. Nelson. 1999. State-Space Models with Regime Switching – Classical and 
Gibbs-Sampling Approaches and Applications . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Naik, V., M. Devarajan, A. Nowobilski, S. Page, and N. Pedersen. 2016. Factor Investing and 
Asset Allocation – A Business Cycle Perspective . Charlottesville, VA: CFA Institute Research 
Foundation.
Rockafellar, R. T. and S. Uryasev. 2000. “Optimization of Conditional Value at Risk. ” Journal of 
Risk 2 (3): 21–42. 10.21314/JOR.2000.038
Swensen, D. F. 2009. Pioneering Portfolio Management: An Unconventional Approach to 
Institutional Investment . New York: Free Press.
Takahashi, D. and S. Alexander. 2001. “Illiquid Alternative Asset Fund Modeling. ” Yale School 
of Management (January).
Practice Problems 183
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions 
1-8
Kevin Kroll is the chair of the investment committee responsible for the gover -
nance of the Shire Manufacturing Corporation (SMC) defined benefit pension 
plan. The pension fund is currently fully funded and has followed an asset mix of 
60% public equities and 40% bonds since Kroll has been chair. Kroll meets with 
Mary Park, an actuarial and pension consultant, to discuss issues raised at the 
last committee meeting.
Kroll notes that the investment committee would like to explore the benefits of 
adding alternative investments to the pension plan’s strategic asset allocation. 
Kroll states:
Statement 1 The committee would like to know which alternative asset 
would best mitigate the risks to the portfolio due to unexpected 
inflation and also have a relatively low correlation with public 
equities to provide diversification benefits.
The SMC pension plan has been able to fund the annual pension payments 
without any corporate contributions for a number of years. The committee is 
interested in potential changes to the asset mix that could increase the probabili -
ty of achieving the long-term investment target return of 5.5% while maintaining 
the funded status of the plan. Park notes that fixed-income yields are expected to 
remain low for the foreseeable future. Kroll asks:
Statement 2 If the public equity allocation remains at 60%, is there a single 
asset class that could be used for the balance of the portfolio 
to achieve the greatest probability of maintaining the pension 
funding status over a long time horizon? Under this hypothet -
ical scenario, the balance of the portfolio can be allocated to 
either bonds, hedge funds, or private equities.
Park confirms with Kroll that the committee has historically used a tradition -
al approach to define the opportunity set based on distinct macroeconomic 
regimes, and she proposes that a risk-based approach might be a better method. 
Although the traditional approach is relatively powerful for its ability to handle 
liquidity and manager selection issues compared to a risk-based approach, they 
both acknowledge that a number of limitations are associated with the existing 
approach.
Park presents a report (Exhibit 1) that proposes a new strategic asset allocation 
for the pension plan. Kroll states that one of the concerns that the investment 
committee will have regarding the new allocation is that the pension fund needs 
to be able to fund an upcoming early retirement incentive program (ERIP) that 
SMC will be offering to its employees within the next two years. Employees who 
have reached the age of 55 and whose age added to the number of years of com -
pany service sum to 75 or more can retire 10 years early and receive the defined 
benefit pension normally payable at age 65.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 184
Exhibit 1: Proposed Asset Allocation of SMC Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Asset 
ClassPublic 
EquitiesBroad Fixed 
IncomePrivate 
EquitiesHedge 
FundsPublic Real 
Estate Total
Target 45% 25% 10% 10% 10% 100%
Range 35%–55% 15%–35% 0%–12% 0%–12% 0%–12% –
Kroll and Park then discuss suitability considerations related to the allocation in 
Exhibit 1. Kroll understands that one of the drawbacks of including the proposed 
alternative asset classes is that daily reporting will no longer be available. Invest -
ment reports for alternatives will likely be received after monthly or quarter-end 
deadlines used for the plan’s traditional investments. Park emphasizes that in a 
typical private equity structure, the pension fund makes a commitment of capital 
to a blind pool as part of the private investment partnership.
In order to explain the new strategic asset allocation to the investment commit -
tee, Kroll asks Park why a risk factor-based approach should be used rather than 
a mean–variance-optimization technique. Park makes the following statements:
Statement 3 Risk factor-based approaches to asset allocation produce more 
robust asset allocation proposals.
Statement 4 A mean–variance optimization typically overallocates to the 
private alternative asset classes due to stale pricing.
Park notes that the current macroeconomic environment could lead to a bear 
market within a few years. Kroll asks Park to discuss the potential impact on 
liquidity planning associated with the actions of the fund’s general partners in the 
forecasted environment.
Kroll concludes the meeting by reviewing the information in Exhibit 2 pertain -
ing to three potential private equity funds analyzed by Park. Park discloses the 
following due diligence findings from a recent manager search: Fund A retains 
administrators, custodians, and auditors with impeccable reputations; Fund B has 
achieved its performance in a manner that appears to conflict with its reported 
investment philosophy; and Fund C has recently experienced the loss of three key 
persons.
Exhibit 2: Potential Private Equity Funds, Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
Private Equity Fund Fund A Fund B Fund C
5-year IRR 12.9% 13.2% 13.1%
1. Based on Statement 1, Park should recommend:
A. hedge funds.
B. private equities.
C. commodity futures.
2. In answering the question raised in Statement 2, Park would most likely  
recommend:
A. bonds.
Practice Problems 185
B. hedge funds.
C. private equities.
3. A limitation of the existing approach used by the committee to define the oppor -
tunity set is that it:
A. is difficult to communicate.
B. overestimates the portfolio diversification.
C. is sensitive to the historical look-back period.
4. Based on Exhibit 1 and the proposed asset allocation, the greatest risk associated 
with the ERIP is:
A. liability.
B. leverage.
C. liquidity.
5. The suitability concern discussed by Kroll and Park most likely  deals with:
A. governance.
B. transparency.
C. investment horizon.
6. Which of Park’s statements regarding the asset allocation approaches is correct?
A. Only Statement 3
B. Only Statement 4
C. Both Statement 3 and Statement 4
7. Based on the forecasted environment, liquidity planning should take into account 
that general partners may:
A. call capital at a slower pace.
B. make distributions at a faster pace.
C. exercise an option to extend the life of the fund.
8. Based on Exhibit 2 and Park’s due diligence, the pension committee should con -
sider investing in:
A. Fund A.
B. Fund B.
C. Fund C.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 186
The following information relates to questions 
9-13
Eileen Gension is a portfolio manager for Zen-Alt Investment Consultants 
(Zen-Alt), which assists institutional investors with investing in alternative 
investments. Charles Smittand is an analyst at Zen-Alt and reports to Gension. 
Gension and Smittand discuss a new client, the Benziger University Endowment 
Fund (the fund), as well as a prospective client, the Opeptaja Pension Plan (the 
plan).
The fund’s current portfolio is invested primarily in public equities, with the 
remainder invested in fixed income. The fund’s investment objective is to support 
a 6% annual spending rate and to preserve the purchasing power of the asset base 
over a 10-year time horizon. The fund also wants to invest in assets that provide 
the highest amount of diversification against its dominant equity risk. Gension 
considers potential alternative investment options that would best meet the 
fund’s diversification strategy.
In preparation for the first meeting between Zen-Alt and the fund, Gension and 
Smittand discuss implementing a short-biased equity strategy within the fund. 
Smittand makes the following three statements regarding short-biased equity 
strategies:
Statement 1 Short-biased equity strategies generally provide alpha when 
used to diversify public equities.
Statement 2 Short-biased equity strategies are expected to provide a higher 
reduction in volatility than bonds over a long time horizon.
Statement 3 Short-biased equity strategies are expected to mitigate the risk 
of public equities by reducing the overall portfolio beta of the 
fund.
Gension directs Smittand to prepare asset allocation and portfolio characteristics 
data on three alternative portfolios. The fund’s risk profile is one factor that po -
tential lenders consider when assigning a risk rating to the university. A loan cov -
enant with the university’s primary lender states that a re-evaluation of the uni -
versity’s creditworthiness is triggered if the fund incurs a loss greater than 20% 
over any one-year period. Smittand states that the recommended asset allocation 
should achieve the following three goals, in order of priority and importance:
 ■Minimize the probability of triggering the primary lender’s loan covenant.
 ■Minimize the probability of purchasing power impairment over a 10-year 
horizon. 
 ■Maximize the probability of achieving a real return target of 6% over a 
10-year horizon.
Smittand provides data for three alternative portfolios, which are presented in 
Exhibits 1 and 2.
Practice Problems 187
Exhibit 1: Asset Allocation
Alternative 
Portfolio CashPublic 
Equity Gov’t. CreditHedge 
FundReal 
EstatePrivate 
Equity
A 4.0% 35.0% 6.0% 5.0% 20.0% 10.0% 20.0%
B 2.0% 40.0% 8.0% 3.0% 15.0% 7.0% 25.0%
C 1.0% 50.0% 3.0% 6.0% 10.0% 0.0% 30.0%
 
Exhibit 2: Portfolio Characteristics
Alternative 
Portfolio1-Y ear 
99% VaR1-Y ear 99% 
CVaRProbability of 
Meeting 6% Real 
Return (10-Y ear 
Horizon)Probability of 
Purchasing Power 
Impairment (10-Y ear 
Horizon)
A −16.3% −19.4% 56.1% 2.5%
B −17.4% −20.6% 58.8% 2.8%
C −19.3% −22.7% 61.0% 4.0%
Notes:
 ■One-year horizon 99% VaR: the lowest return over any one-year period at a 
99% confidence level
 ■One-year horizon 99% CVaR: the expected return if the return falls below 
the 99% VaR threshold
 ■Probability of purchasing power impairment: the probability of losing 40% 
of the fund’s purchasing power over 10 years, after consideration of new 
gifts received by the fund, spending from the fund, and total returns
Gension next meets with the investment committee (IC) of the Opeptaja Pen -
sion Plan to discuss new opportunities in alternative investments. The plan is a 
$1 billion public pension fund that is required to provide detailed reports to the 
public and operates under specific government guidelines. The plan’s IC adopted 
a formal investment policy that specifies an investment horizon of 20 years. The 
plan has a team of in-house analysts with significant experience in alternative 
investments. 
During the meeting, the IC indicates that it is interested in investing in private 
real estate. Gension recommends a real estate investment managed by an expe -
rienced team with a proven track record. The investment will require multiple 
capital calls over the next few years. The IC proceeds to commit to the new real 
estate investment and seeks advice on liquidity planning related to the future 
capital calls.
9. Which asset class would best satisfy the Fund’s diversification strategy?
A. Private equity
B. Private real estate
C. Absolute return hedge fund
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 188
10. Which of Smittand’s statements regarding short-biased equity strategies is 
incorrect?
A. Statement 1
B. Statement 2
C. Statement 3
11. Based on Exhibit 2, which alternative portfolio should Gension recommend for 
the fund given Smittand’s stated three goals?
A. Portfolio A
B. Portfolio B
C. Portfolio C
12. Which of the following investor characteristics would most likely  be a primary -
concern for the plan’s IC with respect to investing in alternatives?
A. Governance
B. Transparency
C. Investment horizon
13. With respect to liquidity planning relating to the plan’s new real estate invest -
ment, Gension should recommend that the fund set aside appropriate funds and 
invest them in:
A. 100%REITs.
B. 100% cash equivalents.
C. 80% cash equivalents and 20% REITs.
The following information relates to questions 
14-15
Ingerðria Greslö is an adviser with an investment management company and 
focuses on asset allocation for the company’s high-net-worth investors. She pre -
pares for a meeting with Maarten Pua, a new client who recently inherited a $10 
million portfolio solely comprising public equities. 
Greslö meets with Pua and proposes that she create a multi-asset portfolio by 
selling a portion of his equity holdings and investing the proceeds in another 
asset class. Greslö advises Pua that his investment objective should be to select an 
asset class that has a high potential to fulfill two functional roles: risk diversifica -
tion and capital growth. Greslö suggests the following three asset classes:
 ■Public real estate
 ■Private real assets (timber)
 ■Equity long/short hedge funds
 
Practice Problems 189
14. Determine  which asset class is most likely  to meet Pua’s investment objective. 
Justify  your response.
 ■Public real estate
 ■Private real assets (timber)
 ■Equity long/short hedge funds
15. Five years after his first meeting with Pua, Greslö monitors a private real estate 
investment that Pua has held for one year. Until recently, the investment had 
been managed by a local real estate specialist who had a competitive advantage in 
this market; the specialist’s strategy was to purchase distressed local residential 
housing properties, make strategic property improvements, and then sell them. 
Pua is one of several clients who have invested in this opportunity.
Greslö learns that the specialist recently retired and the investment is now 
managed by a national real estate company. The company has told investors 
that it now plans to invest throughout the region in both distressed housing and 
commercial properties. The company also lengthened the holding period for each 
investment property from the date of the initial capital call because of the com -
plexity of the property renovations, and it altered the interim profit distribution 
targets.
Discuss  the qualitative risk issues that have most likely materialized over the past 
year.
The following information relates to questions 
16-18
The Ælfheah Group is a US-based company with a relatively small pension plan. 
Ælfheah’s investment committee (IC), whose members collectively have a rela -
tively basic understanding of the investment process, has agreed that Ælfheah is 
willing to accept modest returns while the IC gains a better understanding of the 
process Two key investment considerations for the IC are maintaining low over -
head costs and minimizing taxes in the portfolio. Ælfheah has not been willing to 
incur the costs of in-house investment resources.
Qauhtèmoc Ng is the investment adviser for Ælfheah. He discusses with the IC 
its goal of diversifying Ælfheah’s portfolio to include alternative assets. Ng sug -
gests considering the following potential investment vehicles:
 ■Publicly traded US REIT
 ■Relative value hedge fund 
 ■Tax-efficient angel investment
Ng explains that for the relative value hedge fund alternative, Ælfheah would be 
investing alongside tax-exempt investors.
16. Determine  which of the potential investment vehicles best meets the investment 
considerations for Ælfheah. Justify  your response. Explain  for each  investment 
not selected why the investment considerations are not met.
 ■Publicly traded US REIT
 ■Relative value hedge fund 
 ■Tax-efficient angel investment
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 190
17. Ng and the IC review the optimal approach to determine the asset allocation 
for Ælfheah, including the traditional and risk-based approaches to defining the 
investment opportunity set.
Determine  which approach to determine the asset allocation is most appropriate  
for Ælfheah. Justify  your response. 
 ■Traditional
 ■Risk based
18. The following year, Ng and the IC review the portfolio’s performance. The IC has 
gained a better understanding of the investment process. The portfolio is meet -
ing Ælfheah’s liquidity needs, and Ng suggests that Ælfheah would benefit from 
diversifying into an additional alternative asset class. After discussing suitable 
investment vehicles for the proposed alternative asset class, Ng proposes the 
following three investment vehicles for further review:
 ■Funds of funds (FOFs)
 ■Separately managed accounts (SMAs) 
 ■Undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) 
Determine  the investment vehicle that would be most appropriate  for Ælfheah’s 
proposed alternative asset class. Justify  your response. 
The following information relates to questions 
19-20
Mbalenhle Calixto is a global institutional portfolio manager who prepares for 
an annual meeting with the investment committee (IC) of the Estevão University 
Endowment. The endowment has €450 million in assets, and the current asset 
allocation is 42% equities, 22% fixed income, 19% private equity, and 17% hedge 
funds.
The IC’s primary investment objective is to maximize returns subject to a given 
level of volatility. A secondary objective is to avoid a permanent loss of capital, 
and the IC has indicated to Calixto its concern about left-tail risk. Calixto consid -
ers two asset allocation approaches for the endowment: mean–variance optimi -
zation (MVO) and mean–CVaR (conditional value at risk) optimization.
19. Determine  the asset allocation approach that is mostsuitable  for the Endow -
ment. Justify  your response. 
 ■MVO
 ■Mean–CVaR optimization
20. Calixto reviews the endowment’s future liquidity requirements and analyzes one 
of its holdings in a private distressed debt fund. He notes the following about the 
fund:
 ■As of the most recent year end:
 ●The NAV of the endowment’s investment in the fund was €25,000,000.
 ●All capital had been called.
Practice Problems 191
 ■At the end of the current year, Calixto expects a distribution of 18% to be 
paid. 
 ■Calixto estimates an expected growth rate of 11% for the fund.
 
Calculate  the expected NAV of the fund at the end of the current year.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 192
SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. Real assets (which include energy, infrastructure, timber, commod -
ities, and farmland) are generally believed to mitigate the risks to the portfolio 
arising from unexpected inflation. Commodities act as a hedge against a core 
constituent of inflation measures. Rather than investing directly in the actual 
commodities, commodity futures may be incorporated using a managed futures 
strategy. In addition, the committee is looking for an asset class that has a low 
correlation with public equities, which will provide diversification benefits. Com -
modities are regarded as having much lower correlation coefficients with public 
equities than with private equities and hedge funds. Therefore, commodities will 
provide the greatest potential to fulfill the indicated role and to diversify public 
equities.
2. C is correct. When projecting expected returns, the order of returns from highest 
to lowest is typically regarded as private equities, hedge funds, bonds. Therefore, 
the probability of achieving the highest portfolio return while maintaining the 
funded status of the plan would require the use of private equities in conjunction 
with public equities. In addition, private equities have a high/strong potential to 
fulfill the role of capital growth. Fixed-income investments are expected to have a 
high/strong potential to fulfill the role of safety.
3. B is correct. A traditional approach has been used to define the opportunity 
set based on different macroeconomic conditions. The primary limitations of 
traditional approaches are that they overestimate the portfolio diversification and 
obscure the primary drivers of risk.
4. C is correct. With the introduction of the early retirement incentive plan (ERIP), 
the defined benefit pension plan will likely be called upon to make pension pay -
ments earlier than originally scheduled. As a result, the near term liquidity of the 
plan is the greatest risk arising from the addition of the alternative asset classes 
(e.g., private equities, hedge funds, and real estate). Investments in alternatives, 
such as private equities, can take upwards of five years to reach a full commit -
ment and potentially another decade to unwind.
5. B is correct. The pension plan’s investment in private equities via a blind pool 
presents the prospect that less than perfect transparency will be associated with 
the underlying holdings of the alternative asset manager. Capital is committed for 
an investment in a portfolio of assets that are not specified in advance. In addi -
tion, reporting for alternative funds is often less transparent than investors are 
accustomed to seeing on their stock and bond portfolios.
6. C is correct. Statement 3 is correct because risk factor-based approaches to asset 
allocation can be applied to develop more robust asset allocations. Statement 4 is 
correct because a mean–variance optimization typically overallocates to the pri -
vate alternative asset classes, partly because of underestimated risk due to stale 
pricing and the assumption that returns are normally distributed
7. C is correct. Park notes that the current macroeconomic environment could lead 
to a bear market within a few years. Liquidity planning should take into account 
that under a scenario in which public equities and fixed-income investments are 
expected to perform poorly, general partners may exercise an option to extend 
the life of the fund.
8. A is correct. Fund A should be selected based on both quantitative and quali -
Solutions 193
tative factors. Fund A has a five-year IRR (12.9%) that is slightly lower than, but 
comparable to, both Fund B (13.2%) and Fund C (13.1%). Given the sensitivity 
to the timing of cash flows into and out of a fund associated with the IRR calcu -
lation, however, the final decision should not be based merely on quantitative 
returns. It is also important to monitor the investment process and the invest -
ment management firm itself, particularly in alternative investment structures. 
Considering the qualitative factors identified by Park, Fund A is the only fund 
with a strong, positive factor: It benefits from service providers (administrators, 
custodians, and auditors) with impeccable reputations. Fund B seems to be 
experiencing style drift, which suggests that the returns are not consistent with 
the manager’s advertised investment edge (hence, a negative factor). Fund C has 
experienced the departure of key persons, which puts future fund returns in 
jeopardy (hence, a negative factor).
9. C is correct. An absolute return hedge fund has a greater potential to diversify 
the fund’s dominant public equity risk than either private equity or private real 
estate. Absolute return hedge funds exhibit an equity beta that is often less than 
that of private equity or private real estate. Also, absolute return hedge funds 
tend to exhibit a high potential to diversify public equities, whereas equity long/
short hedge funds exhibit a moderate potential to fulfill this role. 
A is incorrect because although private equity provides moderate diversification 
against public equity, an absolute return hedge fund has a greater potential to do 
so. The primary advantage of private equity is capital growth. 
B is incorrect because private real estate provides only moderate diversification 
against public equity, whereas absolute return hedge funds have a greater poten -
tial to do so. The primary advantage of private real estate is income generation. 
10. B is correct. While bonds reduce the probability of achieving a target return over 
time, they have been more effective as a volatility mitigator than alternatives over 
an extended period of time.
A is incorrect because Statement 1 is correct. Short-biased strategies are expect -
ed to provide some measure of alpha in addition to lowering a portfolio’s overall 
equity beta. 
C is incorrect because Statement 3 is correct. Short-biased equity strategies help 
reduce an equity-dominated portfolio’s overall beta. Short-biased strategies are 
believed to deliver equity-like returns with less-than-full exposure to the equity 
premium but with an additional source of return that might come from the man -
ager’s shorting of individual stocks. 
11. A is correct. Among the three portfolios, Portfolio A minimizes the probability 
of triggering the primary lender’s loan covenant, which is the highest-priority 
goal, because it has the lowest one-year 99% CVaR, –19.4%. Portfolio A also has 
the lowest probability of purchasing power impairment over a 10-year horizon 
(2.5%). While Portfolio A has the lowest probability of achieving a real return 
target of 6% over a 10-year horizon (56.1%), that is the least important goal to be 
met. Therefore, Gension should recommend Portfolio A for the fund.
B is incorrect because Portfolio B has a one-year 99% CVaR of –20.6%, which 
crosses the loan covenant threshold of a 20% loss. Portfolio A is the only one 
that satisfies the most important goal and is the portfolio least likely to trigger 
the loan covenant. Since Portfolio B does not achieve the most important goal 
of minimizing the probability of triggering the primary lender’s loan covenant, 
Portfolio B should not be the recommended portfolio.
C is incorrect because despite the fact that Portfolio C has the highest probability 
of meeting the 6% real return over a 10-year horizon, 61.0%, it also has a one-year 
99% CVaR of –22.7% and thus the highest probability of triggering the loan 
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 194
covenant. Portfolio A is the only one that satisfies the most important goal and 
is the portfolio least likely to trigger the loan covenant. Since Portfolio C does 
not achieve the most important goal of minimizing the probability of triggering 
the primary lender’s loan covenant, Portfolio C should not be the recommended 
portfolio.
12. B is correct. As a public pension fund that is required to provide detailed reports 
to the public, a primary concern for the IC is transparency. Investors in alterna -
tive investments must be comfortable with less than 100% transparency in their 
holdings. Private equity funds often necessitate buying into a “blind pool. ” Al -
though an investor can look at the assets acquired in a manager’s previous funds, 
there is no assurance that future investments will exactly replicate the previous 
funds.
A is incorrect because the IC has a formal investment policy, as well as an 
in-house team with experience in alternatives and the knowledge and capacity to 
critically evaluate alternative investments.
C is incorrect because the IC has a long-term investment horizon. While inves -
tors with less than a 15-year horizon should generally avoid investing in alterna -
tives, the IC has a 20-year investment horizon that should easily accommodate an 
investment in private equity.
13. A is correct. REITs are most appropriate for funds committed to private real 
estate investments since they will have the most similar return and risk charac -
teristics and will help maintain the strategic asset allocation of the plan. Although 
cash equivalents have less volatility over a short-term horizon, they are less likely 
to meet the plan’s long-term return objectives.
B is incorrect because the opportunity cost of being out of the markets over the 
next few years during the capital call period makes cash equivalents an inappro -
priate investment. Although cash equivalents have lower volatility, which is often 
desirable over a short-term period, they will not help the plan meet its long-term 
return objectives.
C is incorrect because, although REITs will have the return and risk character -
istics most similar to private real estate, a 20% allocation is not large enough 
to achieve the plan’s long-term return objectives. The 80% allocation to cash 
equivalents will greatly affect the return, making the plan less likely to meet the 
long-term return objectives.
14. Private real assets (timber) is most likely  to meet Pua’s investment objective.
 ■Timber exhibits a low correlation with public equities and can fulfill the 
functional role of risk diversification.
 ■Timber provides high long-term returns and can fulfill the functional role of 
capital growth.
Private real assets (timber) is the asset class most likely to meet Pua’s objec -
tive. Private real assets, such as timber, tend to exhibit a low correlation with 
public equities and therefore have a high potential to fulfill the functional 
role of risk diversification in Pua’s current all-equity portfolio. In addition, 
timber has a high potential to fulfill the functional role of capital growth in 
the portfolio since growth is provided by the underlying biological growth of 
the tree as well as through appreciation in the underlying land value.
Compared with timber, public real estate as an asset class would likely offer 
less opportunity for capital growth and lower diversification benefits. Also, 
equity long/short hedge funds as an asset class would provide a moderate 
degree of risk diversification in Pua’s all-equity portfolio but do not carry 
significant capital growth potential.
Solutions 195
15. 
 ■Pua’s investment has been affected by key person risk as shown by the effect 
of the management change.
 ■Style drift has occurred as shown by the change from a local to a regional 
investment strategy and the expansion of the investment strategy to include 
commercial properties.
 ■The risk of the investment has changed owing to the added complexity of 
the property renovations.
 ■The longer holding periods and the change in interim profit distribution 
targets will affect this investment.
 ■Client/asset turnover following the management change may now affect the 
performance of the investment.
 ■The management change may alter the client profile, which could have a 
negative effect on investment performance.
Qualitative considerations can lead to a better understanding of the revised 
strategy for the investment and whether this investment remains suitable for Pua. 
Pua’s investment has been affected by key person risk as shown by the man -
agement change from the local manager to a national company. Style drift has 
occurred as shown by the change from a local to a regional investment strategy 
and the expansion of the strategy to include commercial properties.
The risk of the investment has changed because of the added complexity of the 
renovations, and monitoring the company’s risk management will be important 
for Greslö as she manages Pua’s portfolio. Monitoring of the private real estate 
investment has revealed discrepancies in the new management strategy of the 
national company relative to the initial investment strategy of the local manager, 
including the longer holding periods and the changed interim profit distribu -
tion targets. Client/asset turnover following the management change may now 
significantly affect the performance of the investment. Finally, the change in 
management may alter the client profile, which could have a negative effect on 
investment performance.
16. Publicly traded US REIT best meets the investment considerations for Ælfheah. 
The publicly traded US REIT offers tax advantages to Ælfheah from the depre -
ciation of its US real estate assets. The depreciation would help offset income 
received on those assets. In addition, the REIT would not require an in-house 
management team; thus, Ælfheah can maintain low overhead costs.
The relative value hedge fund is unlikely to be a tax-efficient strategy for Ælf -
heah. This tax inefficiency is seen frequently with many hedge fund strategies, 
especially those funds and fund companies where tax-exempt investors dominate 
the client base. The fund manager may be insensitive to tax considerations for a 
taxable investor such as Ælfheah. 
The tax-efficient angel investment is a specialized investment that will require a 
highly customized investment approach. Researching and managing this type of 
investment will require an in-house team to locate and supervise these more spe -
cialized investments. Adding these resources would increase overhead costs and 
violate the IC’s investment consideration of maintaining low overhead costs. 
17. The traditional approach to determine the asset allocation is most appropriate  for 
Ælfheah. 
 ■The traditional approach is more appropriate since describing the roles of 
various asset classes is intuitive.
Learning Module 3 Asset Allocation to Alternative Investments 196
 ■This approach will be easier for Ng to explain to the IC, whose members 
have only a basic understanding of the investment process.
 ■This approach will make it easier to identify relevant mandates for the port -
folio’s alternative investments.
 ■Since Ælfheah seeks to maintain low overhead costs, the risk-based 
approach would not be appropriate.
The traditional approach is more appropriate for Ælfheah. The IC is less 
sophisticated in its understanding of alternative investments but may have 
some familiarity with the traditional asset class-based approach. Listing 
the roles of various asset classes will be more intuitive and easy for Ng to 
explain to the IC.
The traditional approach has relevance for the IC’s liquidity and opera -
tional considerations. This approach will make it easier to identify relevant 
mandates for the alternative investments in the portfolio. The traditional 
approach also will allow the IC to obtain a better understanding of how vari -
ous asset classes behave so that Ng can tailor the asset allocation to address 
any concerns. The traditional approach will be easier to implement, and the 
IC does not want to add costly in-house resources, which would likely be 
necessary with the risk-based approach.
18. FOFs is the the investment vehicle that would be most appropriate  for Ælfheah’s 
proposed alternative asset class.
 ■An FOF would allow Ælfheah to co-invest with other investors in alternative 
investment opportunities for which Ælfheah might otherwise be too small 
to participate.
 ■An in-house team would not be necessary to review and maintain an FOF, 
which uses an outside manager.
 ■Ælfheah is unlikely to meet the very high minimum investment of an SMA, 
which may also require enhanced in-house investment resources.
 ■Ælfheah does not need the higher liquidity of UCITS, which have a less 
attractive risk/return profile for Ælfheah’s relatively small-sized portfolio.
An FOF is the most appropriate investment vehicle for Ælfheah. This vehicle 
allows Ælfheah to co-invest alongside other investors in order to participate 
in alternative investment opportunities for which it would otherwise be too 
small to participate. An expert in-house team would not be necessary to 
review and maintain the types of investments in an FOF since this invest -
ment vehicle uses an outside manager.
SMAs are available for certain large portfolios, such as those of large family 
offices or foundations, but it is unlikely that Ælfheah would meet the very 
high minimum investment requirement. This type of investment poses 
greater operational challenges for the investor; thus, an SMA may require 
enhanced in-house investment resources. UCITS are less appropriate for 
Ælfheah since its liquidity needs are being met. Ælfheah should instead 
invest in a vehicle that offers lower liquidity with a more attractive risk/
return profile. Also, UCITS have regulatory restrictions that can make them 
more difficult for a fund manager to implement the desired investment 
strategy.
19. Mean–CVaR optimization is the asset allocation approach that is most suitable  
Solutions 197
for the Endowment.
 ■Mean–CVaR will better address the IC’s concern about left-tail risk (the risk 
of a permanent capital loss).
 ■If the portfolio contains asset classes and investment strategies with nega -
tive skewness and long tails, CVaR optimization could materially alter the 
asset allocation decision.
Given the IC’s investment objectives for the endowment, using a mean–
CVaR optimization approach is more suitable for determining the asset 
allocation. The IC has 36% of its portfolio invested in alternative assets, 19% 
in private equity, and 17% in hedge funds. Thus, the IC has a more sophis -
ticated understanding of risk and will appreciate the more nuanced view 
of risk offered by mean–CVaR optimization. The portfolio has exposure 
to alternative investments, and the IC is concerned about left-tail risk (the 
risk of a permanent loss of capital), as indicated to Calixto. Thus, the asset 
allocation decision will be enhanced by the more detailed understanding of 
left-tail risk offered by mean–CVaR optimization relative to MVO. MVO 
cannot easily accommodate the characteristics of most alternative invest -
ments. MVO characterizes an asset’s risk using standard deviation. Standard 
deviation, a one-dimensional view of risk, is a poor representation of the 
risk characteristics of alternative investments for which asset returns may be 
not normally distributed. MVO typically over-allocates to alternative asset 
classes, partly because risk is underestimated because of stale or infrequent 
pricing and the underlying assumption that returns are normally distributed.
An investor particularly concerned with the downside risk of a proposed 
asset allocation may choose to minimize the portfolio’s CVaR rather than its 
volatility relative to a return target. If the portfolio contains asset classes and 
investment strategies with negative skewness and long tails, CVaR optimiza -
tion could materially alter the asset allocation decision.
20. The expected NAV of the fund at the end of the current year is €22,755,000, cal -
culated as follows:
First, the expected distribution at the end of the current year is calculated as
 Expected distribution  
 = [Prior-year  NAV × (1 + Growth rate)] × (Distribution  rate).
 Expected distribution  = [(€25,000,000  × 1.11) × 18%] = €4,995,000.
Therefore, the expected NAV of the fund at the end of the current year is 
 Expected NAV 
 = Prior-year  NAV × (1 + Growth rate) + Capital contributions  – Distributions.
 Expected NAV = (€25,000,000  × 1.11) + 0 − €4,995,000  = €22,755,000.

An Overview of Private 
Wealth Management
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
discuss the different types of individual wealth and how wealth is 
created and distributed globally
evaluate how changes in human capital, financial capital, and 
economic net worth across the financial stages of an individual’s life 
influence their financial decision making
justify how returns, risks, objectives, and constraints for individuals 
relate to their human and financial capital
evaluate how various types of taxes imposed on individual investors 
and the impact of inflation influence investment decisions
discuss the differences between private and institutional clients and 
formulate an appropriate Investment Policy Statement for private 
clients
INTRODUCTION
Private wealth management  combines financial planning and investment manage -
ment to help individual investors, particularly high-net-worth individuals (HNWIs)  
and ultra-high-net-worth individuals (UHNWIs) , manage their wealth . This service 
encompasses several interconnected processes including personalized financial plan -
ning, specialized investment and financial advice, portfolio management, and advising 
on wealth management, tax planning, and estate planning matters.
Over the past 40 years global wealth has increased significantly, and private wealth 
management has become an integral, vital service offered by financial institutions, 
banks, asset management firms, and specialized advisors. This reading uses terms like 
“private wealth managers, ” “wealth managers, ” “managers, ” and “advisors” interchange -
ably and refers to their individual investors as “private clients” or, simply, “clients. ”
Private wealth management is a highly tailored service and involves close collab -
oration between the wealth manager and the client to define, plan for, and achieve 
financial objectives. Wealth managers work with clients to understand their financial 
goals, risk tolerance, and investment preferences, typically focusing on one or more 
of the interconnected processes listed above. They establish a complete picture of 1LEARNING MODULE
4
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 200
the client’s personal and financial circumstances including assets, liabilities, income, 
and expenses. In developing comprehensive financial plans, wealth managers are 
supported by tax advisory, estate planning, wealth transfer, and multigenerational 
planning expertise.
The primary objective of private wealth managers is to maximize after-tax wealth 
while considering the client’s goals, risk tolerance, and portfolio constraints. Private 
wealth managers can add value in various ways, such as purchasing undervalued 
securities, selling overpriced securities, and improving asset allocations. Efficient tax 
management is essential, as taxes can significantly impact net performance for the 
taxable investor. Tax rates, especially for HNWIs, can greatly influence returns and 
typically have a more substantial effect than portfolio management costs. Moreover, 
private wealth managers can offer retirement strategies, charitable giving and philan -
thropic advising, and client education on various financial matters when needed. This 
underscores the comprehensive approach to private wealth management.
This reading presents a framework for private wealth management based on a 
life-cycle view of human capital. Section 1 introduces the concept of wealth in a global 
context. Section 2 discusses the life-cycle view of human capital and its influence on 
investment decision making. Section 3 examines individual investors’ return and risk 
considerations, including their objectives and constraints. Section 4 addresses the 
impact of taxation and inflation on investment decision making. Finally, Section 5 
concludes the reading by exploring the unique features of individual investors, their 
investment plans, and investment policy statements.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
 ■Net worth refers to the value of all assets owned by an individ -
ual, minus any liabilities or debts. Sources of wealth include 
accumulated after-tax income from personal and business assets and 
intergenerational wealth transfers.
 ■Following World War II, global growth was boosted by new technol -
ogy, more competition, government policies that supported busi -
nesses, and, in some cases, privatization of public services. The growth 
of free market capitalism, fewer regulatory obstacles, easier access 
to investment capital, and an increase in entrepreneurship and new 
businesses greatly encouraged global economic growth and wealth cre -
ation. The increase in the value of assets and financial innovations also 
played a role.
 ■The global expansion of free markets in recent decades pushed global 
per capita wealth higher, especially in lower middle income and low 
income economies.
 ■However, wealth inequality measures indicate increasing levels of 
inequality across global populations, with greater disparities in devel -
oped markets. While there is more wealth, there is also more wealth 
inequality.
 ■Individual investors and institutional investors have different time 
horizons, tax structures, liquidity needs, investment knowledge and 
research capabilities, decision-making processes, access to investment 
opportunities, and roles in the market.
 ■Individual investors in developed and emerging markets have different 
levels of access to financial information, different investment opportu -
nities available to them, different investment preferences, and different 
regulatory environments.
Introduction 201
 ■The wealth life cycle  of an individual investor typically consists of 
seven phases: the education phase, the early career phase, the career 
development phase, the peak accumulation phase, the preretirement 
phase, the early retirement phase, and the late retirement phase.
 ■Human capital is the net present value of an individual's future 
expected labor income. Economic balance sheets include the human 
capital of an individual and provide a more comprehensive view of 
an individual’s wealth. Individual wealth and asset composition tend 
to evolve throughout their lifetime, with financial wealth typically 
increasing as the horizon to build human capital declines.
 ■Consequently, as individuals approach retirement, the value of their 
assets and investments tends become a more significant portion of 
their aggregate human capital.
 ■Individuals need to diversify their income and risk sources during the 
wealth accumulation phase to decouple it from their human capital.
 ■Wealthier individuals in retirement may focus less on covering costs 
and more on fulfilling philanthropic goals, transferring wealth, and 
achieving other long-term financial objectives.
 ■Models for quantifying wealth, such as human capital calculations, are 
useful but may not fully capture the complexities of real-life situations.
 ■The impact of inflation on investment returns can vary based on the 
investment horizon. Investors should focus on preserving their long-
term purchasing power, not just nominal returns.
 ■Assessing a client’s risk tolerance involves understanding their will -
ingness and ability to bear financial risk. Risk tolerance questionnaires 
are commonly used, but they have limitations and should be sup -
plemented with in-depth discussions that can yield valuable insights 
about the individual’s risk tolerance and investment approach.
 ■Clients often have multiple financial goals, and their risk tolerance 
may vary for each. Goals can be either planned (like retirement or 
specific purchases) or unplanned (like unexpected expenses).
 ■In most jurisdictions, different tax rates apply to different types of 
investment returns: interest, dividends, and capital gains or losses. 
Some tax systems impose a wealth tax, which function similarly to 
income taxes by reducing after-tax returns and accumulations.
 ■Tax drag, or the negative effect of taxes on after-tax returns, increases 
with higher investment returns and longer investment horizons.
 ■Deferral of taxes, often applied to capital gains, helps accumulate 
returns without tax drag until they are realized. The benefit of tax 
deferral compounds over time and can outweigh a lower tax rate over 
time. Investments with deferred capital gains taxation can be more tax 
efficient than those with annually taxed returns.
 ■Tax-advantaged investment vehicles help mitigate the impact of taxes 
on investment returns by offering tax deferrals, reduced tax rates, or 
tax exemptions, enabling investors to retain more returns for reinvest -
ment and growth over time.
 ■Portfolio returns originate from various sources and are subject to dif -
ferent tax rates, which must be considered for portfolio management.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 202
 ■Inflation affects future purchasing power and can change consumption 
patterns throughout an individual’s life cycle. Solely focusing on nomi -
nal returns can distort the perception of an investment’s real, after-tax, 
long-term performance.
 ■By considering the joint effects of taxes and inflation, investors can 
make informed decisions and choose investments for the most favor -
able long-term outcomes.
 ■An investment policy statement (IPS) documents a client’s specific 
investment goals, risk tolerance, investment time frame, and con -
straints and reflects the mutual understanding of the investment 
manager’s mandate.
 ■The IPS defines the investment process, clarifies the advisor’s fiduciary 
duty, and is updated regularly to accommodate changes in the client’s 
situation or market conditions.
 ■The main components of an IPS are the client’s background and 
investment objectives, investment program parameters, portfolio asset 
allocation ranges, portfolio management processes, and duties and 
responsibilities of the involved parties.
WEALTH IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT
discuss the different types of individual wealth and how wealth is 
created and distributed globally
The first section focuses on the concept of wealth, sources of wealth and income, and 
the distribution of wealth across the world.
Defining Wealth
Typically, wealth refers to the value of all the assets owned by an individual less any 
liabilities or debts owed, as shown in Exhibit 1 . There are various approaches to 
categorizing asset types, but the following offers a comprehensive view of different 
sources of wealth, excluding human capital, which we will discuss later.2
Wealth in a Global Context 203
Exhibit 1: Aggregate Wealth
Household
goodsPublic
equity
Bonds and
loans
Mutual funds,
ETF
Shares in
pooled
alternative
assetsJewelry,
valuables
Cars,
motorcycles
Boats,
ships,
yachts
Airplanes,
helicoptersBank
deposits
Equity in
privately
held
business
Private
debt
Insurance
AnnuitiesPrivate
pensionsPublic
pensionsPrimary
residence
Investment
property
Farmland,
timberlandResidential,
non-
investment
propertyCollectibles,
art
Digital
assetsPatents
Trademarks
Copyrights
Mineral
rightsAggregate
wealth
Personal
assetsFinancial
assetsRightsReal
assets
Personal
propertyPublicly
tradedPrivately
heldPensions Real estate CommoditiesOther
assets
To determine someone’s wealth, it is necessary to differentiate among various defi -
nitions of wealth. Exhibit 2  breaks down wealth into distinct components including 
personal, financial, real assets, and rights.
Exhibit 2: Components of Wealth
Aggregat e wealthPublicly
tradedPrivately
held PensionsReal
estat e CommoditiesOther
asset sReal assets Rights Personal
propertyFinancial assets
Financial w ealth
Real w ealth
Productive wealth
Liquid w ealth
Investable wealth
An individual’s aggregate wealth  is the total value of all assets owned, encompassing 
personal property, financial assets, real assets, and rights. Net worth  is the difference 
between assets and liabilities whose values are relatively easy to measure, such as 
publicly traded investments, privately held assets, real estate, and debts, as illustrated 
in Exhibit 3 .
This representation excludes intangible assets like copyrights, digital rights, and 
other nontangible assets, claims, or rights, which can be a significant part of wealth 
but are not included here because of their uncertain market value, complex valuation, 
and limited liquidity.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 204
Exhibit 3: Net Worth
Real Asset sSurplus
Short- term deb t
(Credit car d, taxes)
Long-t erm deb t
(House, education)PV of fu ture
consumption
Bequest sPersonal Asset s
Human Capital
Financial Asset s
ASSET S LIABILITIES
 ■ Personal property  typically comprises items like automobiles, clothes, fur -
niture, and personal residences. Generally, personal assets  are not expected 
to appreciate in value and are often worth more to the individual than their 
current fair market value. Some assets, like real estate and collectibles (jew -
elry, wine, stamps, and artwork), could be considered “mixed” assets with 
both personal and real asset characteristics. Some consider primary resi -
dential property as a personal property. Others would consider secondary 
residential properties as investments. For simplicity, we categorize primary 
residential property as a real asset.
 ■Financial wealth  comprises all financial assets, such as publicly traded 
equity, debt, and investments in pooled vehicles like mutual funds, and 
alternative assets like hedge funds, private equity, and private debt invest -
ments. Financial wealth excludes direct ownership in non–publicly traded 
businesses like family businesses. Financial assets are often the easiest to 
identify and include both tangible investment assets and less tangible assets 
like accrued pensions. One criterion for subdividing financial assets is mar -
ketability: publicly traded, non–publicly traded, or privately held. Portfolio 
management has traditionally concentrated on publicly traded financial 
assets, overlooking privately held assets such as annuities, insurance, and 
business assets. 
 ■Real wealth  refers to tangible assets typically including real estate, com -
modities, and other owned assets and excluding both personal property 
and financial assets. Real assets, especially a primary residence, may be the 
largest asset owned by an individual. For example, in Germany, approxi -
mately half of households own a home, whereas in China, the number is 
closer to 90%. To purchase a home, most individuals obtain a mortgage, a 
loan secured by the property, which is frequently the largest fixed obligation 
of homeowners. The use of debt to purchase homes magnifies the impact of 
home value changes on homeowners’ equity and net worth.
 ■Productive wealth  reflects assets that can be used to generate income 
through production and business operations, such as a business directly 
owned by an individual or a family. For many wealthy individuals, pro -
ductive wealth constitutes the largest portion of their aggregate wealth. 
Investing for business owners involves unique considerations, as their total 
capital may be closely tied to their business’s overall performance (i.e., if 
Wealth in a Global Context 205
the business does poorly, it affects not only the value of the business but 
also the owner’s earnings). The value of business assets may vary based on 
market conditions and will often correlate with other financial assets within 
a household portfolio.
 ■Liquid, available, or cash wealth  refers to assets that can be easily converted 
into cash, typically including publicly traded equity and debt in addition to 
cash and cash equivalents, bank deposits, or ready cash held on hand.
 ■ Investable wealth  refers to financial and other assets that are readily 
available for investment and is typically a subset of financial assets. Private 
wealth management often focuses primarily on investable wealth.
 ■Investable net worth  is the sum of liquid assets, such as savings and invest -
ment accounts, and less short-term liabilities such as credit card debt.
 ■Economic net worth  extends net worth to include claims to future assets 
that can be used for consumption, such as the individual’s human capital 
and pension benefits. Human capital  is the present value of future income 
streams adjusted by the actuarial probability of survival, wage growth, and 
a discount rate that reflects occupational income risk. A large part of an 
individual’s wealth may be attributable to pensions, different types of retire -
ment plans offered across the globe. Pensions can be offered by employers 
or government programs. Forms of retirement plans vary. Common forms 
include employee-directed savings plans, in which the contribution amounts 
and investments are controlled by the individual, or traditional defined ben -
efit pension plans that guarantee some level of retirement benefits typically 
based on past wages. Government pensions are like employer pension plans 
but are generally more secure (in countries with low inflation and a high 
degree of creditworthiness). Because pension benefits typically accrue over 
time, only their vested value should be recognized in current wealth calcu -
lations; moreover, because they are claims on future cash payments, their 
value can be hard to estimate, and they are not as liquid as other financial 
assets. When we refer to economic net worth in this reading, we refer to 
the more holistic accounting of resources that can be used to fund future 
consumption for the purpose of financial planning over the life cycle.
The simplest balance sheet for an individual includes recognizable marketable 
assets (investment portfolio, retirement portfolio, real estate, and other tangible and 
intangible items of value) and liabilities (mortgage debt, credit card debt, auto loans, 
business or other debts guaranteed by the individual, and student loans). Such a simple 
balance sheet or statement of net worth is depicted in the case study below.
Valuing publicly traded investments and homeowners’ equity is relatively straight -
forward. For example, an individual with a home valued at EUR1 million and a 
EUR900,000 mortgage only has EUR100,000 in equity. However, the human capital of 
an individual is influenced by hard-to-quantify factors such as wage growth, income 
risk, and economic considerations. Two individuals with the same life expectancy, 
each earning EUR50,000 annually, may experience positive or negative events over 
time (unexpected wage growth, job loss, or other impacts to their income) that lead 
to significantly different wealth outcomes.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 206
CASE STUDY
Taylor, Aiysha, and Chimwala: Traditional Balance 
Sheet
Assets for three clients across different wealth levels and asset distributions are:
 ■Taylor: Young professional with limited assets (age: 25)
 ■Aiysha: Established small business owner with substantial assets tied 
up in the business (age: 45)
 ■Chimwala: Entrepreneur who is about to sell a large private business 
(age: 55)
Balance Sheet as of 31 December 20X1 in Thousands of EUR
 
Assets and liabilities Taylor  
Age 25Aiysha  
Age 45Chimwala  
Age 55
Liquid assets      
Checking accounta10 35 400
Savings account 20 100 500
Total liquid assets 30 135 900
Investment assets      
Taxable investment account 5 350 1,000
Retirement plan, private pensionb75 2,000 500
Tax advantaged investment account 75 750 1,500
Total investment assets 155 3,100 3,000
Personal property      
Apartment, house - 1,000 300
Vacation home - 500 250
Cars - 500 100
House contents 10 150 200
Collectibles - 300 50
Total personal property 10 2,450 900
Business assets      
Direct and / or indirect ownership in busi -
ness or business interestsc- 5,000 25,000
Total assets (Aggregate worth) 195 10,685 29,800
Short-term liabilities      
Short-term debt, credit card debt 15 250 5
Total short-term liabilities 15 250 5
Long-term liabilities      
Education loans 300 500 -
Car loan 10 400 -
Home mortgage - 500 -
Home equity loan - 750 500
Business debt      
Wealth in a Global Context 207
Assets and liabilities Taylor  
Age 25Aiysha  
Age 45Chimwala  
Age 55
Business loansd- 4,000 7,000
Total long-term liabilities 310 6,150 7,500
Total liabilities 325 6,400 7,505
Net worth (130) 4,285 22,295
Investable net worthe100 1,200 3,000
Investable net worth after the business is 
sold  2,200 21,000
 
a As a transaction account, the checking account may not be considered as part of investable net 
worth
b Retirement plans may or may not be considered part of investable net worth, depending on the 
structure of the retirement plan
c The way assets are held can vary based on a company’s structure, as they may be owned directly 
or indirectly through a suitable legal entity; valuation methods for privately held assets have been 
discussed earlier in the curriculum
d Corporate debt, as corporate equity, can be either direct or indirect, and it might be backed by 
the company's ultimate beneficial owner; valuing privately held liabilities can be simplified using 
the valuation adjustments previously explained
e Savings account and investment accounts, excluding pension
This balance sheet presents the varied financial situations of three clients, each 
with different backgrounds and asset levels. A wealth manager can utilize this 
information to develop customized strategies for each client, addressing their 
distinct financial objectives and situations.
 ■Taylor, a young professional, has a limited amount of assets and liabil -
ities. Most of the assets are liquid and investable, while the liabilities 
are short term. However, considering the significant educational debt 
load (which is not unusual for young professionals), Taylor currently 
has a negative net worth. Moreover, if Taylor’s income grows as a 
result of the educational investment, then the negative net worth 
should disappear as the loans are repaid.
 ■Aiysha, a successful small business owner, has a higher net worth but 
also carries substantial debt, which consists of personal debt, mortgage 
debt, and business debt.
 ■Chimwala, an entrepreneur, boasts a remarkable net worth, but the 
assets are mostly locked up in business assets. Once the business is 
liquidated, Chimwala’s assets will become liquid, realizing the value of 
the ownership as it is converted into investable assets.
For both Aiysha and Chimwala, the portion of total assets invested in their 
businesses is crucial, as equity and retained earnings constitute a significant 
part of their current wealth. The percentage of earnings they allocate as com -
pensation influences their present consumption, while retaining earnings can 
enhance their businesses’ cash flow, capital, and competitive standing.
Sources of Global Wealth
In the decades following World War II, economic growth around the world has 
been substantial, albeit geographically uneven and sometimes volatile. This history 
is described in the example box on global economic transformation below and illus -
trated in Exhibit 4 .
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 208
This economic growth reflects fundamentally improved economic opportunities 
combining technological advances, increased economic and business competition, 
broad deregulation, business-friendly policies, privatization, and emphasis on entre -
preneurship as an engine for growth, with changes in international trade that integrate 
different parts of the world. Other contributing factors to wealth creation have been 
positively trending asset price appreciation and the marginal but often anecdotally 
supported influx of accidental wealth through unexpected stardom. While we could 
consider windfalls from lottery earnings, gambling wins, inherited wealth, or court 
settlements as examples of such unforeseen wealth, it is critical to emphasize that 
these instances primarily involve wealth transfer rather than wealth generation.
Exhibit 4: GDP Growth for the World and Select Countries Measured by the Average Per Capita GDP 
between 1960 and 2022 in Constant 2010 USD
05,00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,00035,00040,00045,00050,000
1960GDP per capita 2010 USD
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
Year
World China Japan India United Kingdom Brazil
Source:  Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, https://  fred .stlouisfed  .org.
THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
The global economic landscape fundamentally changed after World War II. The 
war brought about the collapse of the old colonial system, while technological 
breakthroughs spurred persistent productivity growth and increased interna -
tional trade further accelerated economic growth. These political, economic, and 
commercial changes were transformative and led to a substantial rise in global 
wealth. Exhibit 5  shows the 10-year change in GDP per capita.
Wealth in a Global Context 209
 
Exhibit 5: Decennial Change in GDP Per Capita in Selected Geographic Areas between 1950 and 2020
 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020Change of GDP in capita in percent
South Asia Africa Western Europe
Eastern Europe Latin America China
Source:  World Bank Data, World Development Indicators (WDI), https://  data  .worldbank  .org.
Decolonization played a key role in this transformation. European powers such 
as Britain and France could no longer maintain their colonial empires, leading to 
over 50 countries gaining independence from 1945 to 1960. Despite challenges 
such as political instability and social inequalities, this shift allowed new nations 
to control resources and industries, leading to economic expansion.
In South Asia, India and Bangladesh pursued economic strategies that led to 
both growth and challenges. India focused on developing heavy industries and 
infrastructure, achieving a 3.5% annual GDP growth rate from 1951 to 1980. 
Bangladesh, after initial struggles, saw wealth creation through the growth of 
its ready-made garment industry.
In Africa, countries faced different economic outcomes after decoloniza -
tion. While nations like Botswana and Mauritius achieved significant economic 
growth through good governance and economic diversification, others, like 
Somalia and Nigeria, suffered because of various reasons including corruption 
and political instability.
Europe saw a division in economic paths, with Western Europe experiencing 
rapid growth through economic integration and Eastern Europe struggling under 
inefficient centrally planned economies. However, the fall of the Soviet Union in 
1991 prompted market-oriented reforms leading to growth in Eastern Europe.
In Latin America, countries experienced varied economic outcomes based on 
state intervention, external influences, and policy effectiveness. While policies 
encouraging domestic market production initially led to growth, they eventually 
resulted in inefficiencies and hindered wealth creation. External actors and global 
economic shifts also significantly influenced the region’s economic outcomes.
Economic opportunities  are crucial in driving economic growth and wealth cre -
ation. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, market-oriented economic policies and 
increased cross-border competition boosted global economic capacity and spurred 
wealth creation. Advances in information technology and widespread adoption of 
many other new technologies led to unprecedented productivity growth. Increased 
trade flows between different parts of the world also contributed to growth.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 210
The shift towards free market capitalism also played a significant role. Countries 
like the United Kingdom, former Soviet bloc nations, and Latin American countries 
such as Mexico and Brazil adopted aggressive privatization policies, transferring 
state-owned assets to private ownership. This improved efficiency and competitiveness 
across various industries and contributed to wealth creation.
Reductions in regulatory barriers, more access to funding and capital, and increased 
global connectivity and communication facilitated a surge in business formation.
The rise in entrepreneurship and business creation led to job creation, innovation, 
and economic growth in both developed and developing countries. These new ventures 
fostered a more competitive business environment, driving further advancements in 
technology and productivity and ultimately contributing to the global increase in wealth.
However, protracted economic growth has not been uniform worldwide nor has it 
translated into broader wealth creation across all segments of the society. A commonly 
advanced argument is that economic growth does not directly translate to income 
growth and that wealth growth does not directly reflect income growth, as shown in 
Exhibit 6 . In fact, rapid economic growth can exacerbate income inequality, as the 
benefits mainly accrue to those who control the means of production, investable capital, 
and natural resources and can leverage their financial, social, political, and intellectual 
capital. High income concentration can reduce demand from the general population, 
further concentrating capital and wealth in the hands of the already wealthy. To counter 
these developments, policymakers can implement policies that promote competition, 
dismantle oligopolies and monopolies, and transfer wealth through taxation. Breaking 
up dominant market players reduces market entry barriers, fosters innovation, and 
provides opportunities for new businesses to grow. This process can stimulate job 
creation and promote a more equitable distribution of wealth.
Moreover, investing in education, building infrastructures, and improving both 
access to and the quality of healthcare can support long-term economic growth and 
benefit the broader population. This not only supports social mobility but also sup -
ports the workforce by giving individuals the skills necessary to compete globally. 
Both of these developments also support wealth creation and wealth accumulation. 
Nonetheless, almost all countries have benefited from economic growth.
Exhibit 6: Net National Wealth to Net National Income Per Capita between 1995 and 2020 in Constant 2021 
PPP EUR
World Africa Americas Asia Europe Middle East Oceania8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020Net national wealth to net national income per 
capita in constant 2021 PPP EUR
Wealth in a Global Context 211
Note:  Net national wealth to net national income per capita is calculated in constant 2021 PPP EUR.
Source:  World Income Inequality Database – WIID, 30 June 2022. https://  www  .wider  .unu  .edu/  
database/  world  -income  -inequality  -database  -wiid .
Gains from economic growth are reflected in Credit Suisse’s Global Wealth Report 
2022 ( Exhibit 7 ), which shows that global per capita wealth has increased over the 
past 20 years, most notably in the lower middle income and low income economies 
that account for 75% of the world’s population and one-third of global GDP .
MEASURING NET WORTH
The lack of a universally accepted definition of net worth leads to different 
organizations using their own methodologies when calculating it. For example, 
Credit Suisse defines net worth or “wealth” of households as the value of financial 
assets plus real assets (mainly housing) owned by households, minus their debts. 
This resembles a household’s balance sheet, listing owned items and their net 
value if sold. Credit Suisse’s definition excludes private pension fund assets but 
includes state pension entitlements. It does not consider human capital or an 
individual’s share in state-owned assets and debts, which are difficult to assign 
to individuals.
This definition may differ from academic research on wealth and income 
inequality, which can use varying metrics, methodologies, and models leading 
to different wealth and income levels. Additionally, estimates for the ultra-
wealthy may rely on statistical approximations rather than census data. As a 
result, comparisons between different studies on wealth and income should be 
made cautiously, considering the specific definitions and methodologies used.
According to the World Bank’s classification, in 2021, lower middle income 
economies had a gross national income (GNI) per capita ranging from USD1,036 
to USD4,045. The upper middle income economies had a GNI per capita between 
USD4,046 and USD12,535. According to the same classification, China is an upper 
middle income economy. India is identified as a lower middle income economy. This 
classification highlights the connection between economic opportunities and acceler -
ated wealth growth in rapidly developing countries. There are no countries classified 
as low income in Europe or North America, and all North American countries are 
considered high income countries.
Exhibit 7: Average Per Capita Wealth Growth in USD between 2000 and 
2021 across Different Regions and Income Levels
Region/countryHigh 
incomeUpper middle 
incomeLower middle 
incomeLow 
incomeAverage 
growth
Africa 164% 165% 190% 210% 194%
Asia Pacific 107% 186% 192% 123% 159%
China   289%     289%
Europe 127% 229% 302%   154%
India     177%   177%
Latin America 88% 125% 149% –18% 112%
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 212
Region/countryHigh 
incomeUpper middle 
incomeLower middle 
incomeLow 
incomeAverage 
growth
North America 113%       113%
Average 117% 170% 193% 187% 160%
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  
media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications/  global  -wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf. Data as 
of December 31, 2021.
Since the 1980s, entrepreneurship  and new business formation has grown across the 
world. Entrepreneurs create new markets, disrupt old industries, and create jobs by 
incorporating new technologies, increasing access to capital and information, engaging 
in global trade and investments, and shifting attitudes for risk taking and innovation. 
Many entrepreneurs build and sell their business, thereby transferring real wealth to 
financial wealth. Increasingly, entrepreneurs drive economic growth by creating new 
products, services, and markets using the latest technological advances.
Asset price appreciation , especially in the United States and other developed 
markets, drove wealth growth over the past decades. Exhibit 8  shows the relationship 
between global stock market capitalization and global GDP . Between 1970 and the 
end of 2021, both the global stock market capitalization and global GDP grew by 
around 7%. The graph shows that global stock market capitalization and global GDP 
are highly positively correlated over the time period.
Exhibit 8: The Growth of Global Stock Market Capitalization and Global GDP in Current USD between 1970 
and 2021
0255075100 3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020World GDP in Current Trillion USD
MSCI World Index
World Bank World GDP in Current USD MSCI World Index
Source:  Bloomberg. MXWO Index is the annual MSCI World Index and WGDPWRLD is the World 
Bank World GDP in Current USD.
Privatizing government assets, selling family-owned businesses, and initial public 
offerings contributed to this wealth increase. So did financial innovation and financial 
product development, which drove investments into commodity and real estate mar -
kets worldwide. Even though the public listing of a family-owned business reclassifies 
wealth (from privately held wealth to publicly held wealth, as the cash proceeds from 
sales can be invested in financial assets), wealth created through entrepreneurship and 
asset price appreciation remains the main source of wealth creation in most economies.
Wealth in a Global Context 213
Furthermore, the significance of inheritance-related wealth transfers is predicted 
to increase in the future. However, this is not the creation of new riches, but rather 
the transfer of existing wealth between generations. In the coming decades, the Silent 
Generation (those born between 1925 and 1945) and the Baby Boomers (those born 
between 1946 and 1965) will transfer trillions of USD in wealth to subsequent gen -
erations through inheritances and gifts.
Finally, accidental wealth through large legal settlements and awards and lottery and 
gambling winnings is a small but anecdotally significant source of wealth. Gambling is 
not directly derived from productive work but can dramatically change an individual’s 
financial status overnight. These sources of wealth may be less common, and they do 
not create new wealth, but they transfer existing wealth.
Much like lottery or gambling winnings, sudden fame can lead to a rapid accumu -
lation of wealth for individuals who suddenly gain immense popularity or recognition 
in their respective fields such as entertainment, sports, or social media. However, 
unlike lottery winnings, sudden fame leads to wealth creation.
The global distribution of financial wealth, nonfinancial wealth, and indebtedness 
generally has remained stable over time across different regions. Here, nonfinancial 
wealth includes personal property and real assets but excludes human capital. Exhibit 
9 shows the distribution of total wealth from 2000 and 2020. Although there are clear 
disparities among the drivers of wealth growth at the national level — reflecting, in 
part, differences in economic development, market structure, economic policy, and 
political preferences — there are some notable regional patterns.
Exhibit 9: Distribution of Total Wealth across the Globe
Region Wealth type in percent 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Africa Financial wealth 41 44 43 39 44
  Nonfinancial wealth 59 56 57 61 56
  Debts 9 11 11 8 7
Asia- Pacific Financial wealth 50 52 50 50 50
  Nonfinancial wealth 50 48 50 51 50
  Debts 15 12 12 12 12
China Financial wealth 36 37 41 43 44
  Nonfinancial wealth 64 63 59 57 56
  Debts 1 4 6 8 11
Europe Financial wealth 49 43 41 45 45
  Nonfinancial wealth 52 57 59 56 55
  Debts 14 14 15 14 13
India Financial wealth 24 24 24 22 24
  Nonfinancial wealth 76 76 76 78 76
  Debts 6 7 8 8 9
Latin America Financial wealth 38 40 40 45 46
  Nonfinancial wealth 62 60 60 55 54
  Debts 10 9 12 11 11
North America Financial wealth 67 62 68 71 72
  Nonfinancial wealth 33 38 32 29 29
  Debts 14 16 17 14 12
World Financial wealth 55 51 51 53 54
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 214
Region Wealth type in percent 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
  Nonfinancial wealth 45 49 49 47 46
  Debts 14 14 14 12 12
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. Data as of December 31, 2021. 
https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications / global  
-wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf.
Between 2000 and 2020, China experienced a significant increase in indebtedness, 
which may be due to its rapid economic growth and the need for credit to support 
that growth. In North America, financial wealth plays a crucial role, possibly because 
of a strong financial market performance, a widespread investment in financial assets, 
and an overall favorable investment and tax climate. Nonfinancial wealth is more 
important in India, consistently accounting for around 76% of total wealth from 
2000 to 2020, which could be attributed to a cultural emphasis on holding tangible 
assets, such as real estate and gold, traditionally viewed as reliable stores of value in 
Indian culture. Finally, both Africa and India tend to accumulate relatively low levels 
of debt compared to other regions, with debts constituting 7% to 9% of total wealth 
in 2020. This may reflect limited access to credit financing, substantial underbanked 
populations, and a general cultural aversion to debt.
Exhibit 10  shows that global wealth is concentrated in North America and Europe, 
which in 2021 collectively accounted for close to 57% of total global wealth.
Exhibit 10: Wealth Distribution across Different Parts of the World at the 
End of 2021
Africa
1%
Asia-Pacific
18%
China
18%
Europe
23%
India
3%Latin America
3%North America
34%
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. Data as of December 31, 
2021. https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications/  
global  -wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf.
Wealth in a Global Context 215
In North America , the primary drivers of wealth are economic growth, largely fueled 
by business formation and entrepreneurship. Steady economic and productivity 
growth, along with positive financial market returns, have led to increased wealth 
levels. However, this wealth distribution has been unequal, primarily benefiting the 
more affluent segments of society. A significant factor contributing to this inequality 
is the prevalence of equity-based compensation for employees in publicly traded 
companies, such as professionals and executives. Additionally, successful business 
owners who have commercialized their ideas and sold their businesses to investors 
contribute to wealth creation. Accomplished professionals, athletes, and artists also 
play a role in generating wealth in North America.
In Europe,  as in North America, economic growth has been a main driver of wealth 
creation. But unlike private business formation or “new money” in North America, 
it is “old money” that dominates Western European wealth. There are a substantial 
number of family-controlled medium- to large-sized businesses in Western Europe 
that typically remain privately held. But the main source of wealth is inherited wealth, 
primarily real estate.
In the formerly Communist Central and Eastern European countries, the signifi -
cant structural economic change and privatization that followed the fall of the Soviet 
Union spurred immense wealth creation, helped by their ascendancy into the European 
Union, increased direct foreign investment, and investments in education. As these 
countries transitioned from communist to market-based economies through waves 
of privatization, many opportunists became wealthy quickly. Example 1  describes the 
changing fortunes of Czechia/Czech Republic and Slovakia (formerly Czechoslovakia) 
during this time. In many other formerly Communist countries with large natural 
resources and commodity-driven economies, there has been significant wealth creation 
that mainly benefitted a group of politically well-connected individuals.
EXAMPLE 1
The Changing Fortunes of Czechoslovakia, Czechia, and 
Slovakia
Czechoslovakia was one of the most prosperous European countries before 
World War II, with an estimated GDP per capita of approximately USD1,800 in 
1938, the highest in Central Europe. It had a developed, diverse, and competitive 
industrial sector.
After World War II Czechoslovakia became a Communist state. Its economy 
became centrally planned, with state ownership of most of its businesses. The 
overall economic growth in Communist Czechoslovakia was slow, and living 
standards remained low, even though both educational opportunities and health 
care improved.
After the fall of Communism in 1989, the new regime started broad mar -
ket-oriented economic reforms. Privatization began in 1991 and led to substantial 
job losses, particularly in industries that were not internationally competitive. 
Additionally, it also led to a few well-connected oligarchs controlling most of 
its economy. Allegations of corruption and cronyism were rampant, but the 
economic changes and privatization revitalized the economy and increased its 
overall competitiveness. Overall, the Czechoslovakian privatization process is 
considered a success. After 1993, when Czechoslovakia peacefully split into two 
independent countries, the Czech Republic (Czechia) and Slovakia, economic 
growth continued.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 216
The Asia-Pacific  region has experienced significant economic growth because of 
high economic growth rates, integration into global commerce, and financial devel -
opment, which has resulted in considerable wealth accumulation. This growth has 
been fueled by a transformation from agrarian-based economies to industrialized 
ones focusing on manufacturing and services. A combination of domestic policies 
and focus on international trade drove this transformation. For instance, Japan, 
South Korea, and Singapore adopted an export-oriented strategy, attracting foreign 
investment, and investing in education and training to develop a globally competitive 
and highly skilled workforce. Both India and China also created considerable wealth. 
The region also has intense entrepreneurship across broad sectors including manu -
facturing, trade, and real estate development. That entrepreneurship in several Asian 
countries, where small and medium-sized enterprises drive economic growth, has 
made many entrepreneurs rich. Moreover, real estate development has also played 
a noticeable role in wealth creation. Finally, the high savings rates, relatively young 
and educated population, and substantive foreign direct investments all contribute 
to wealth accumulation.
In Latin America , the rapid growth and modernization of stagnant economies have 
resulted in a significant increase in personal wealth; however, the wealth is distributed 
relatively unequally. Several Latin American countries have some of the largest wealth 
and income inequalities. Enterprises and small business owners are also a source of 
wealth. However, sustained economic growth and political stability remain elusive in 
many Latin American nations.
In the Middle East , petroleum remains the main economic driver, having gener -
ated tremendous affluence. However, this wealth is extremely concentrated among a 
small number of families who have inherited their riches over multiple generations 
and control significant portions of national economies. Example 2  discusses a shift 
away from oil dependence, as Saudi Arabia is seeking to diversify its economy by 
investing its wealth into sectors that can continue to propel its economic growth, 
albeit at a lower rate.
EXAMPLE 2
The Saudi 2030 Vision
Because up to 40% of Saudi Arabia’s GDP comes directly from oil revenue, in 
2016 the country launched the Vision 2030 plan to reduce the country’s reliance 
on oil, diversify its economy, and improve the quality of life for its citizens. The 
plan focuses on three main pillars.
The first pillar aims to create a tolerant, cohesive society that is committed 
to Islamic and national values and can support the growth of the economy.
The second pillar aims to develop new industries, attract foreign investment, 
and reduce the country’s dependence on oil exports. The plan is to raise non–
oil-related export sources of Saudi Arabia’s GDP by 2030, specifically to raise 
the share of non-oil GDP from 16% to 50%. Because a fall in oil prices negatively 
affects the economy, such diversification reduces Saudi Arabia’s dependence on 
oil as the main driver of its economy. To further reduce its reliance on oil, this 
plan also aims to increase foreign direct investment inflows from approximately 
4% of GDP in 2019 to close to 6% by 2030. Through economic diversification, 
Saudi Arabia intends to insulate its economy from secular changes in the demand 
for oil, as the demand for oil is expected to slow down. Finally, the plan also 
seeks to transform Saudi Arabia into one of the world’s 15 largest economies.
The third pillar aims to improve the education system, develop the health 
care sector, and create a more efficient and effective government. Additionally, 
the goal is to increase the international competitiveness of the educational 
Wealth in a Global Context 217
sector, aiming to have five Saudi universities among the top 200 universities in 
international rankings. Moreover, the plans call to increase Saudi Arabian life 
expectancy to 80 years from 74 years.
A successful implementation of Vision 2030 could increase Saudi Arabia’s 
geopolitical influence in the Middle East.
In recent years, Africa  has witnessed a rather robust increase in wealth driven 
by revenues from oil and other commodities, the acceleration in GDP growth, the 
increase in foreign direct investment, the comparatively robust performance of local 
economies, and the relative appreciations of local currencies. Still, wealth remains 
concentrated among the ruling elite, executives, and professionals, as well as small 
and family-owned enterprises. Wealth in Africa is highly concentrated, with inequality 
levels comparable to those found in Latin America. Many African countries, such as 
Botswana, are pursuing policies to reduce their reliance on their core industries and 
diversify their economies as discussed in Example 3 .
EXAMPLE 3
Botswana’s Economic Diversification: Moving Beyond 
Diamonds
Botswana, as the world’s top producer of gem diamonds, generates around 40% of 
the global output, and diamonds contribute to around 35% to its GDP . Botswana 
now aims to expand other sectors and diversify its economy by focusing on 
tourism, agriculture, and manufacturing.
Capitalizing on Botswana’s diverse wildlife and natural beauty, tourism has 
grown in significance. In 2000, tourism accounted for approximately 6% of GDP . 
In 2019, it represented 13%. Because agriculture amounts to 2% of its GDP and 
is important to subsistence farmers, the government in Botswana has been 
enhancing both farming productivity and crop diversity. Finally, Botswana is 
also promoting investments in industries such as manufacturing, services, and 
technology to create jobs and foster economic growth.
Understanding growth in real wealth, particularly in countries or regions that have 
suffered extreme economic changes or otherwise are prone to significant exchange 
rate volatility, requires explicitly accounting for the impacts of inflation and variable 
exchange rates, as Example 4  on Argentina explains.
EXAMPLE 4
The Deceptive Rise of Wealth: Understanding the 
Difference between Nominal and Real Growth in Times of 
Crisis
Argentina has experienced several economic crises including sharp currency 
devaluations and hyperinflation. In the late 1980s, its annual inflation rate was 
almost 500%. In 2002, the inflation rate peaked at 41%. Hyperinflationary periods 
have significantly decreased the real purchasing power of Argentinians. Although 
the nominal wealth of Argentinians appeared to increase because of hyperin -
flation, the devaluation of the currency decreased the foreign currency value of 
their assets. Consequently, the real wealth decreased due to the hyperinflation.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 218
 
Inflation Rate and Relevant USD Exchange Rates in Argentina 1987–2022
 
Annual Argentinian inflation rate Exchange rate: US dollar (USD) vs Argentinian peso (ARS)050100150200
0100200300400500
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017 2022Annual Argentinian inflation rate
Exchange rate: US dollar (USD)
vs Argentinian peso (ARS)
For instance, in 2001, the GDP per capita of Argentina was approximately 
USD7,100, but by 2002, it had fallen to approximately USD2,500 because of 
hyperinflation and currency devaluation. Moreover, the severe economic down -
turn that followed led to a negative real GDP growth rate of –11% in 2002, as 
depicted in the graph below. Furthermore, the poverty rate, measured by the 
proportion of the population living under USD5.50 per day, increased from 31% 
in 2001 to 44% in 2002.
 
GDP Per Capita in USD and GDP Growth in Argentina, 1986–2022
 
–10–50510
1986 1996 1991 2001 2006 2011 2016 20215,000
010,00015,000
Argentina annual GDP growth in percen tArgentina GDP per capita in USD
GDP per capita in USD GDP growth Argentina
The currency devaluation during the economic crisis caused an illusion 
of increased wealth: someone with the equivalent of USD10,000 in the bank 
before the devaluation would have had the equivalent of around ARS10,000. 
After devaluation, the same dollar wealth would be worth around ARS30,000.
Wealth in a Global Context 219
Although nominal wealth increased because of hyperinflation during the 
crisis, the real value of this wealth had actually decreased. The importance of 
factoring in inflation and exchange rates when analyzing wealth growth in markets 
or regions prone to extreme events or exchange rate volatility is underscored 
by this example.
Distribution of Global Wealth
Although the precise wealth levels across the world continuously evolve, driven by 
asset price, commodity price, and exchange rate dynamics, there are some persistent 
trends. First, wealth is unevenly distributed. Second, wealth is highly concentrated. 
Third, very few people hold large amounts of wealth. Fourth, the number of millionaires 
is increasing each year because the USD1 million cutoff point changes with economic 
growth rates, exchange rate fluctuations, and inflation. Understanding these trends 
helps wealth managers better serve their high-net-worth clients.
According to Credit Suisse, in 2021 the household wealth distribution across the 
global adult population of 5.3 billion shows that 2.8 billion people, or 53% of all adults, 
had wealth below USD10,000; 1% of the adults, or approximately 54 million people, 
had wealth exceeding USD1,000,000; see Exhibit 11 .
Exhibit 11: Distribution of Global Wealth
AfricaAsia 
Pacific China Europe IndiaLatin 
AmericaNorth 
America World
Number of adults in 
millions690 1,257 1,111 589 916 453 282 5,299
Mean wealth per adult (in 
USD)8,419 64,700 76,639 180,275 15,535 27,717 560,846 87,489
Median wealth per adult (in 
USD)1,111 5,218 28,258 26,385 3,457 5,139 95,255 8,360
Distribution of adults by wealth range (USD) in percent
Under 10,000 87 63 18 32 75 65 22 53
Between 10,000 and 
100,00012 26 67 36 23 30 29 34
Between 100,000 and 
1,000,0001 10 15 29 2 5 39 12
Over 1,000,000 0 1 1 3 0 0 10 1
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. Data as of December 31, 2021. 
https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications/  global  
-wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf.
Median global wealth is USD8,360, while the mean global wealth is USD87,489, as a 
few individuals with very high levels of wealth can greatly increase the average wealth 
while the median wealth remains relatively low. The global distribution of wealth can 
be shown by comparing the wealth of the top wealth groups compared to the average 
citizen and comparing the average citizen to those at the bottom of the wealth dis -
tribution. Exhibit 12  contains all wealth deciles to show the different distribution of 
wealth across different parts of the world. The top decile of individuals controls more 
wealth than the remaining 90% of the population. At the end of 2021, the bottom 50% 
of adults in the global wealth distribution controlled less than 1% of total global wealth.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 220
Exhibit 12: Distribution of Global Wealth across Deciles
Geographic areasWealth share (%) per wealth population decile Top  
percentile 
(1%) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Africa –1 0 0 0 1 2 3 5 10 79 44
Asia Pacific 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 4 10 82 39
China 0 1 2 2 3 4 6 8 14 60 31
Europe –1 0 0 1 1 2 5 9 16 68 30
India –1 0 1 1 2 3 4 6 11 73 41
Latin America –1 0 0 1 1 2 4 6 12 76 39
North America –1 0 0 1 1 2 4 6 12 74 35
World –1 0 0 0 1 1 2 4 10 82 46
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. Data as of December 31, 2021. 
https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications/  global  
-wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf.
The richest decile, the top 10% of the adults in the world, controls 82% of wealth, 
and the remaining 90% control 18%. For example, in the Asia-Pacific region, the 
top 1% of wealth holders have a wealth share of 39%, while the bottom 90% have a 
wealth share of 18%. In China, the top 10% of wealth holders have a wealth share of 
60%, while the bottom 50% have a wealth share of 9%. Overall, the table shows that 
wealth is concentrated at the top decile, particularly in the top 1%, with the largest 
wealth share in most regions held by this group. The top 1% of the adult population 
controls 46% of the global wealth. In some regions, such as Africa and India, there 
are negative wealth shares in the lower wealth deciles, indicating that those groups 
have negative net worth.
The difference in entry points to different wealth deciles shows the regional differ -
ences in wealth and that, in many parts of the world, a notable number of individuals 
have negative net worth. In 2021, the minimum wealth to belong to the richest 10% 
of the world’s adults was USD138,000, to belong to the richest 5%, USD296,000, and 
to the top 1%, USD1,147,000. There are notable regional and national differences for 
these cutoff points, as shown in Exhibit 13 .
Exhibit 13: Minimum Wealth in USD to Qualify for a Wealth Decile
Geographic area Minimum wealth of deciles  
(USD per adult)
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Africa –235 –14 172 576 1,111 1,988 3,323 5,978 12,692
Asia Pacific –213 513 1,583 3,112 5,218 8,635 15,709 34,796 122,248
China 4,888 11,043 15,279 20,348 28,258 37,907 51,593 80,292 134,193
Europe –266 3,386 8,929 15,044 26,385 57,074 114,292 200,285 397,553
India –596 904 1,398 2,295 3,457 5,243 7,819 12,325 25,377
Latin America –1,229 –541 580 2,576 5,139 8,015 13,122 22,055 48,597
North America –13,302 8,563 22,428 58,948 95,255 156,896 255,099 468,151 909,331
World –162 840 2,214 4,493 8,360 14,155 25,123 51,633 138,346
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  
Wealth in a Global Context 221
media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications/  global  -wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf.
These are threshold estimates to qualify for each of the deciles. Note that there are 
no estimates for the first decile. 
The table shows that the minimum wealth of the different deciles varies greatly 
across regions. In Africa, for example, the poorest 10% have a maximum wealth of 
−USD235 per adult. This means that to be in the second-lowest wealth decile, one 
would have a maximum wealth of −USD235; they are net debtors, with their debts 
exceeding the value of their assets. In contrast, the wealthiest 10% in Africa have a 
minimum wealth of USD12,692 per adult.
The maximum wealth of the poorest 10% in North America, similarly, the entry 
threshold to the second decile of the wealth distribution, is −USD13,302 and is much 
lower than the maximum wealth of the poorest 10% in Asia Pacific, or −USD213. The 
minimum wealth of the wealthiest 10% is also much higher in North America than 
in other regions.
All the data demonstrates the extent of wealth inequality. All countries contain 
varying degrees of wealth inequality or income inequality. Wealth inequality is dif -
ferent from income inequality because income inequality looks at the distribution of 
income generated by society, and wealth inequality looks at the economic distribution 
of assets and their ownership and reinforces wide national wealth gaps.
The Gini coefficient , a more broad-based measure of inequality that focuses on 
the entirety of the wealth spectrum, confirms the skewness of the wealth distribution. 
It ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 represents perfect equality (everyone gets an equal 
share of the wealth) and 1 represents perfect inequality (one individual owns all the 
wealth). It compares the Lorenz curve , the cumulative percentage of wealth owned 
by each percentage of the population, with the line of perfect equality, where wealth 
is uniformly distributed across the population. Each percentage of the population 
owns an equal percentage of the wealth. Example 5  looks at how the Gini coefficient 
captures different types of wealth distribution.
EXAMPLE 5
Gini Coefficient
The Gini coefficient measures wealth inequality in a population. It ranges from 
0 to 1, with 0 indicating a perfectly equal wealth distribution and 1 indicating 
maximum wealth inequality. Here are three examples:
 
Cumulative 
percentage of 
householdsCumulative percentage of wealth
Example 1  
Perfect wealth 
distribution  
Gini coefficient 
= 0Example 2  
Low degree of 
wealth inequality  
Gini coefficient 
= 0.27Example 3  
High degree of 
wealth inequality  
Gini coefficient = 
0.69
0% 0% 0% 0%
10% 10% 1% 1%
20% 20% 5% 2%
30% 30% 10% 3%
40% 40% 20% 4%
50% 50% 30% 6%
60% 60% 40% 7%
70% 70% 55% 10%
80% 80% 70% 20%
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 222
Cumulative 
percentage of 
householdsCumulative percentage of wealth
Example 1  
Perfect wealth 
distribution  
Gini coefficient 
= 0Example 2  
Low degree of 
wealth inequality  
Gini coefficient 
= 0.27Example 3  
High degree of 
wealth inequality  
Gini coefficient = 
0.69
90% 90% 85% 50%
100% 100% 100% 100%
 
Exhibit 14  shows these examples graphically.
 
Exhibit 14: Gini Coefficient and Wealth Distribution
 
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%Proportion of wealth owned
Cumulative percentage of households
Perfect wealth distribution,
GINI coefficient = 0Low degree of wealth inequality,
GINI coefficient = 0.27High degree of wealth inequality,
GINI coefficient = 0.69
In the first example, the Gini coefficient is 0, which represents a perfectly 
equal wealth distribution. This means that every household in the population 
has the same amount of wealth. The area under the Lorenz curve is also 0, which 
indicates that the cumulative percentage of households and the cumulative 
percentage of wealth are the same. This can be an ideal situation for a society 
in terms of wealth equality.
In the second example, the Gini coefficient is 0.27, indicating a low degree of 
wealth inequality in the population. This means that the distribution of wealth 
is relatively even across the population, with a small percentage of households 
holding a disproportionate amount of wealth. The area under the Lorenz curve 
is also relatively small, indicating a smaller degree of inequality. In this situation, 
the mean wealth per household provides a more accurate representation of the 
economic status of the population, as there is less concentration of wealth in a 
small group of households.
In the third example, the Gini coefficient is 0.69, indicating a high degree 
of wealth inequality in the population. This means that a small percentage of 
households have a disproportionate amount of wealth compared to the rest of the 
population. The area under the Lorenz curve is also relatively large, indicating a 
large degree of inequality. In this situation, the mean wealth per household does 
not provide an accurate representation of the economic status of the population, 
as there is a significant concentration of wealth in a small group of households.
Wealth in a Global Context 223
Long-term changes in Gini coefficients reveal trends in wealth inequality. When 
the Gini coefficients rise over time, wealth inequality worsens. Economic policies, 
technological advances, and demographic shifts can affect long-term change in Gini 
coefficients over time, as we can see in Exhibit 15 . In a recession or depression, wealth 
becomes more concentrated among fewer people or households, raising the Gini coef -
ficient. Looking at the global long-term changes between 2000 and 2020, the overall 
wealth distribution appears to have changed in several countries. Both the global finan -
cial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic impacted wealth inequality. Many individuals 
in lower and middle income brackets experienced substantial financial hardships, job 
losses, and economic problems. Wealthier individuals, on average, fared better. The 
COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated this divide. Individuals in lower income brackets, 
usually employed in service-based industries, lost their jobs. Wealthier individuals, 
on the other hand, benefitted from surging stock markets and increased demand in 
certain technology-centric industries.
Although wealth inequality increased in both developed and developing markets, 
the gap is greater in the developed markets due to weaker social safety nets and greater 
income variability.
Exhibit 15: Trends in Gini Coefficients for Selected Countries between 2000 and 2020
2000 2005 2010 2015 20200.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60Gini  coefficient of wewalth
China Germany India Japan Russia United Kingdom
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. Data as of December 31, 
2021. https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications/  
global  -wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf. Reported estimates.
Over time, changes in global wealth inequality reflect both shifts in the wealth inequal -
ity within countries and between countries. The rise of household wealth in many 
emerging markets has pushed overall global wealth inequality down. For instance, 
between 2000 and 2021, the average wealth in India increased by 9% annually and in 
China by 15%. At the same time, the average growth rate of wealth across the globe 
was 5%. The fact that average wealth levels in China are approaching global wealth 
levels suggests that global wealth distribution is becoming less unequal in aggregate.
Private wealth managers have traditionally categorized clients by wealth levels. 
Each wealth stratum presents unique demands, challenges, and opportunities from 
the wealth manager’s perspective. These segments typically include mass-affluent 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 224
and affluent clients in the top decile of the wealth pyramid, as well as wealthier cli -
ents such as HNWIs, very-high-net-worth individuals (VHNWIs), and UHNWIs, as 
shown in Exhibit 16 .
Exhibit 16: Wealth Segments and the Number of Individuals (in Thousands) Belonging to Each of These 
Segments across the Globe
Wealth segmentWealth range  
(in million USD)North 
America EuropeAsia 
Pacific ChinaLatin 
America India Africa World
High net worth 
(HNWI)1–5 21,565 15,300 9,859 5,582 809 696 316 54,126
Very high net worth 
(VHNWI)5–10 3,360 912 587 366 63 59 24 5,371
10–50 1,706 442 279 210 38 37 11 2,723
Ultra-high net worth 
(UHNWI)50–100 107 27 19 20 3 3 1 180
100–500 38 14 10 11 2 2 1 77
500+ 2 2 1 1 1 - - 7
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. Data as of December 31, 2021. 
https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  publications/  global  
-wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf. Numbers are rounded.
However, this segmentation method may not fully capture the sophistication and 
complexity of the guidance, investment planning, and financial, legal, and tax advice 
a client requires. Factors such as a client’s legal and physical domicile, stage in their 
financial life cycle, demographics, income, wealth structure, asset class holdings, and 
values can influence service expectations, which may vary among clients with similar 
wealth levels.
Private wealth managers prioritize liquid or investable wealth over total wealth, 
as it provides an initial indication of a client’s position in the wealth strata and their 
current and future service needs. For example, private wealth managers would offer 
different levels of services to a client with USD50 million that included an investment 
portfolio of USD3 million and a family business equity worth USD47 million, com -
pared to a client with USD45 million in their investment portfolio and USD5 million 
in private real estate.
The UHNWI category typically consists of the upper half of decamillionaires, who 
have a net worth exceeding USD10 million, and includes the centimillionaires, with 
a net worth surpassing USD100 million. As per Forbes ’ 2022 calculations, there are 
around 2,300 billionaires worldwide, and to be among the top 500 richest individuals, 
an estimated net worth of USD5 billion is necessary.
Family offices  play a vital role in managing UHNWIs’ wealth. These private firms 
offer a range of wealth management services, including investment, tax, estate planning, 
and philanthropy management, tailored specifically to UHNWIs and their families’ 
needs. The primary objective of family offices is to preserve and grow wealth across 
generations while tackling the unique challenges and opportunities associated with 
significant wealth. By possessing a deeper understanding of a family’s values, goals, 
and legacy objectives, family offices can effectively address the complex financial needs 
of UHNWIs. This close relationship allows them to develop and execute long-term 
strategies aligned with the family’s vision while navigating the complex legal, tax, and 
regulatory landscape linked to substantial wealth.
Furthermore, family offices often employ or collaborate with highly specialized 
professionals, such as legal advisors, accountants, and investment managers, to deliver 
a holistic wealth management approach. This comprehensive strategy ensures that all 
aspects of a family’s wealth are considered and managed, encompassing investment 
Wealth in a Global Context 225
management, risk mitigation, succession planning, and philanthropic activities. Exhibit 
17 illustrates Bloomberg ’s RICH <GO> function, displaying the richest individuals in 
the world.
Exhibit 17: RICH <GO> at Bloomberg  as of October 31, 2023
It is worth looking at the size of the global UHNWI market to assess the potential 
revenues that accumulated wealth can generate in the following case study.
CASE STUDY
Sizing the Global UHNWI Market
This example estimates the potential revenue for the global UHNWI wealth 
management market based on assets under management–based fees. For assets 
between USD50 million and USD100 million, revenue is around 5 bp; for USD100 
million and USD500 million, around 1 bp; and for assets over USD500 million, 
around 0.1 bp.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 226
 
 
Region  
Data as of 2021 Individuals with wealth 
between  
USD50 m and 100 mIndividuals with wealth 
between  
USD100 m and 500 mIndividuals with 
wealth  
above USD500 mTotal 
number of 
UHNWIs% of 
the 
world
United States 103,669 35,740 1,726 141,135 53.4
China 20,013 11,411 1,282 32,706 12.4
Germany 6,052 3,354 318 9,724 3.7
Canada 3,472 1,912 123 5,507 2.1
India 3,024 1,750 210 4,984 1.9
Japan 3,373 1,411 88 4,872 1.8
France 3,237 1,314 85 4,636 1.8
Australia 2,947 1,576 109 4,632 1.8
United Kingdom 2,787 1,278 110 4,175 1.6
Italy 2,574 1,253 103 3,930 1.5
Korea 2,450 1,319 117 3,886 1.5
Russia 2,134 1,488 253 3,875 1.5
Switzerland 2,115 987 92 3,194 1.2
Hong Kong SAR 1,790 1,139 127 3,056 1.2
Sweden 1,866 1,019 76 2,961 1.1
Taiwan Region 1,874 912 93 2,879 1.1
Spain 1,509 666 51 2,226 0.8
Brazil 1,238 749 95 2,082 0.8
Singapore 974 570 73 1,617 0.6
Netherlands 1,100 471 28 1,599 0.6
 
Source:  Credit Suisse Research Institute, Global Wealth Databook 2022. Data as of December 
31, 2021. https://  www  .credit  -suisse  .com/  media/  assets/  corporate/  docs/  about  -us/ research/  
publications/  global  -wealth  -databook  -2022  .pdf.
To estimate the average wealth within each range, we will use the midpoint of 
the specified intervals. For the USD50 million to 100 million range, we will use 
USD75 million as the average, for the USD100 million to 500 million range, 
USD300 million will serve as the average, and for individuals with wealth 
exceeding USD500 million, the average wealth is conservatively estimated at 
USD1 billion. Based on these calculations, the estimated revenue for the top 
10 countries is approximately USD7.5 billion, while the combined revenue for 
all the mentioned countries is around USD8.5 billion.
Wealth in a Global Context 227
Estimat ed revenue in USD bn
05Canada 0
F...
China 1
India 0United Stat es 5
Wealth inequality is a critical issue in contemporary society. One particularly 
contentious point centers on the tax obligations of UHNWIs and the phenomenon 
of wealthy individuals considering the move to tax-friendly jurisdictions.
THE MOBILITY OF HNWIS
Decisions made by HNWIs and their financial advisors significantly impact not 
only their personal wealth but also the economic and social fabric of their home 
countries. As wealth mobility increases, balancing the legitimate need for wealth 
preservation and legal protection with an ethical responsibility of contributing 
to societal well-being can come to the forefront.
HNWIs might perceive high taxes as unfairly punitive or as diminishing the 
incentive for wealth creation and entrepreneurial activities, and, consequently, 
they often consider moving their assets, legal residence, or both to jurisdictions 
with more tax-friendly policies, “tax havens. ” However, taxes may not be the 
only motivator.
Political risk is a significant concern and goes beyond direct expropriations. 
It can include changes in regulations, legal frameworks, taxation regimes, and 
discriminatory practices. Deteriorating rule of law and instances of physical 
violence, such as kidnappings, can all be substantial threats to their wealth and 
business operations and could compel them to relocate to places offering more 
legal protection, political stability, and predictability. Moreover, political risk 
is not limited to developing countries, as populist governments are elected in 
developed countries, as well.
Investors must consider these factors in their decision-making processes 
when assessing the situation in their home country, the country where they plan 
to seek domicile, and the physical and legal locations of their wealth.
Besides legal, economic, and political factors, there may be a crucial aspect 
wealthy individuals should consider. The wealth many wealthy individuals 
accumulate is often deeply intertwined with the resources and benefits available 
in their country. Elements such as the legal framework, the education system, 
regulatory and political structures, public infrastructure, and educational sys -
tems are often funded by taxpayers and play a significant role in creating an 
environment where businesses and entrepreneurship can thrive and generate 
wealth. Thus, prosperity often depends directly on the infrastructure and public 
goods that taxpayers finance.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 228
When the wealthy leave a country, that could trigger a chain reaction: 
shrinking tax revenues, reducing public expenditures, and potentially placing a 
heavier tax load on the remaining citizens.
QUESTION SET 1
1. Which of the following components of wealth best describes wealth 
associated with an individual’s direct ownership of a business?
A. Financial wealth
B. Real wealth
C. Productive wealth
Solution:
C is the correct response. Productive wealth reflects assets that can be used 
to generate income through production and business operations such as a 
business directly owned by an individual or a family. A is incorrect. as finan -
cial wealth comprises all financial assets but excludes direct ownership of 
businesses. B is incorrect, as real wealth refers to tangible assets such as real 
estate and commodities.
2. Contrast an individual’s aggregate wealth and net worth. 
Solution:
Aggregate wealth is the total value of all assets. Net worth reflects the value 
of assets minus the individual’s liabilities. As such, an individual could con -
ceivably have a very large value of assets versus a low net worth. This would 
happen if an individual were highly levered.
3. Discuss the factors that a private wealth management firm might consider 
with respect to identifying countries in which individuals are likely to have 
greater economic opportunities for income and wealth growth.
Solution:
Factors associated with greater economic opportunities and wealth growth 
within countries or regions include (1) technological advancements that 
contribute to productivity improvements; (2) shifts towards free market 
capitalism; (3) business privatization (transfers of state-owned assets to 
private ownership); (4) increases in business formation, especially entrepre -
neurial ventures that lead to job creation, innovation, and economic growth 
worldwide; and (5) economic and business deregulation. Additionally, asset 
price appreciation in real terms is a factor driving wealth growth in coun -
tries and regions.
4. Which of the following factors would typically result in a scenario where a 
region or country is experiencing economic growth, along with improve -
ment in income and wealth inequality?
A. The regional economy’s growth is highly dependent on natural 
resources.
B. Significant concentration of control of investable capital within a 
country.
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 229
C. Regulatory effort within a country to dismantle monopoly businesses.
Solution:
C is the correct response. A country with a regulatory focus on breaking 
up monopolies may help promote improvements in income and wealth 
inequality. Both responses A and B make statements that would be more 
consistent with higher levels of income and wealth inequality.
5. A country’s Gini coefficient for income distribution is currently 0.35 and 
was 0.25 10 years earlier. Which of the following responses best describes 
the level and change of the country’s income inequality?
A. Income inequality is relatively low currently and has decreased over 
the last 10 years.
B. Income inequality is relatively low currently and has increased over 
the last 10 years.
C. Income inequality is relatively high currently and has improved over 
the last 10 years.
Solution:
B is the correct response. Gini coefficients range from zero to one, with a 
value of zero reflecting income equality. Income inequality is greater as the 
Gini coefficient moves higher. With a value closer to zero, 0.35 likely reflects 
relatively low levels of income inequality. But, as the coefficient has moved 
higher over the last 10 years, it indicates an increase in income inequality or 
a decrease in income equality in the country.
LIFE-CYCLE VIEW OF HUMAN CAPITAL
evaluate how changes in human capital, financial capital, and 
economic net worth across the financial stages of an individual’s life 
influence their financial decision making
Large institutional investors, who typically invest capital on the behalf of their clients, 
differ from individual investors, who invest their own capital with some of the notable 
differences outlined in Exhibit 18 .
Exhibit 18: Differences between Institutional and Individual Investors
Characteristics Institutional Individual
Purpose Specific Multiple
Investment objectives Static Dynamic
Number of liabilities Many Handful
Relative size of individual 
liabilitiesSmall Variable
Time horizon Long term/infiniteMultiple (for different 
objectives)
Asset size Very large Usually small3
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 230
Characteristics Institutional Individual
Investment options More access Less access
Tax situation Differing, often tax-exempt Usually taxable and complex
Performance measurement Index, benchmarkShortfall meeting a goal or 
liability
Client sophistication High Low to average
Risk Objective and quantifiableFailing to meet a specific 
goal
Customization Low to medium High
Institutional investors, such as pension funds, endowments, insurance companies, 
hedge funds, and investment managers, actively allocate capital to generate returns 
aligned with their specific investment mandates. Sometimes these objectives are to 
meet their clients’ financial obligations, who may be individual investors seeking 
long-term capital accumulation by investing with an investment manager.
Institutional investors secure, pool, and manage capital. Some institutional inves -
tors, such as pension funds and insurance companies, have long-term obligations 
towards their clients. These investors design and implement investment strategies 
to fulfill those obligations over long horizons, oftentimes decades. In executing their 
strategies, some institutional investors accumulate returns in a tax-aware manner, 
while others are tax exempt.
Institutional investors measure and evaluate their investment performance against 
defined indices or benchmarks and use risk measures, such as various measures of 
volatility, to quantify the risk that they take with client funds. Many large institutional 
investors have the resources to conduct extensive research and analysis to identify 
investment opportunities in various markets, sectors, and asset classes. Consequently, 
they invest across a diverse array of strategies. Here, because of their size, they benefit 
from economies of scale that reduces their expenses, which they can pass onto their 
clients. These lower expenses can benefit their clients, who do not have the same 
capital or professional research capabilities and who are willing to pay a fee to have 
their assets professionally managed by institutional investors.
Individual investors allocate their own, generally more limited capital to achieve 
multiple, sometimes conflicting, objectives: growing personal wealth, saving for retire -
ment, buying a car or home, starting a business, or leaving a legacy for their heirs. 
Their time horizons combine short-, medium-, and long-term objectives. Some of 
their short-term financial goals may be only a few years away, while their longest-term 
objectives, such as funding retirement and enabling generational wealth transfer, are 
typically bookended by the natural human life span. Overall, individual investors 
manage multiple smaller liabilities, such as saving for a house or retirement, with 
different certainty throughout their lives. Additionally, these investment objectives 
(i.e., liabilities) are more likely to change or evolve over time as the family’s situation 
changes. Because their resources are smaller, individuals typically have less access to 
various investment products or opportunities compared to institutional investors.
Because they are usually taxed on their investment income, capital gains, or 
dividends, individual investors’ decisions may hinge on the tax implications of their 
investment choices. Since tax rates depend on their tax domicile, tax jurisdiction, and 
their level of income, individual investors may benefit from having some flexibility to 
manage the size and timing of their tax obligations. As a result, their tax situations 
can be more complex than those of institutions. Individual investors gauge their per -
formance by their ability to meet their financial objectives. If they do not fulfill their 
financial goals or obligations, they have underperformed their objectives. It is worth 
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 231
emphasizing that, despite some of the additional complexities associated with private 
wealth management, clients are typically less sophisticated in a financial sense than 
institutional clients.
However, there are some individual investors, particularly UHNWIs, for whom 
investment strategies, objectives, and resources are more akin to those of a small or 
medium-size institution than those of an average individual investor. Most UHNWIs 
have large portions of their portfolios allocated to more complex investment strate -
gies that require scale, such as tax-loss harvesting, and alternative investments such 
as private equity, infrastructure, and hedge funds that are normally not accessible to 
the average HNWI.
There are also differences between individual investors domiciled in developed 
markets and in emerging markets. Apart from the notable differences in wealth lev -
els, distinctions in investment opportunities and market conditions also characterize 
the two groups. Many emerging market–domiciled investors seek to pursue wealth 
management services in developed markets to expand their investment alternatives. 
Conversely, investors domiciled in developed markets may seek out emerging market 
investment opportunities. Some pertinent differences in investment opportunities 
between developed and emerging markets are summarized in Exhibit 19 .
Exhibit 19: Differences in Investment Opportunities
  Developed markets Emerging markets
Markets Large, active markets and 
multiple different investment 
alternativesSmaller markets with limited 
investment alternatives
Access to information High Low
Regulation Regulated market practices Less regulated market practices
Compared to investors in emerging markets, individual investors in developed mar -
kets tend to have access to larger, active markets with more investment opportunities, 
have higher access to information, and benefit from more regulated market practices.
Developed markets offer large active financial markets with a range of different 
investment opportunities and investment alternatives. Their robust financial systems, 
mature capital markets, and enhanced transparency collectively promote long-term 
wealth accumulation. The established institutional structure in these markets, includ -
ing access to premium financial information, grants investors a unique advantage for 
long-term wealth accumulation. Moreover, regulatory integrity in developed markets 
safeguards investors, fostering trust in the financial system.
Investors in emerging markets typically can only choose from a more limited array 
of investment alternatives, and the regulatory support for investments may not be 
as stringent as in developed markets. In many emerging markets, investors eschew 
investments in financial markets for familiar investment opportunities, such as private 
businesses owned by family members and friends, or in tangible assets such as real 
estate or gold for long-term wealth accumulation. Nonetheless, considering the size 
and development of emerging markets, there are more and more investors there who 
seek to diversify their investments.
The Wealth Life Cycle
Financial stages of life are a useful construct when thinking about financial goals, 
priorities, objectives, and constraints. The financial stages are often divided into seven 
periods, as Exhibit 20  shows.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 232
Exhibit 20: The Seven Financial Stages of Life
Education
(0–25)Early Career
(25–35)Career
Development
(35–50) Peak
accumulation
(50–60) Pre-
retirement
(60–65)Early
retirement
(65–75) Late
Retirement
(75–… ) 
 ■The education phase  occurs during the individual’s education before enter -
ing the workforce. During this phase, individuals may be financially depen -
dent on their parents or guardians and have little accumulated financial 
capital or focus on savings.
 ■The early career phase  normally begins when an individual enters the work -
force, usually in their late teens to early thirties. During this phase, individ -
uals may marry, have young children, incur debt to purchase a home, and 
begin to save for their children’s education expenses.
 ■The career development phase  typically occurs during the ages of 35–50 and 
is a time of specific skill development, upward career mobility, and income 
growth. However, significant family and housing expenses during this phase 
may limit an individual’s ability to save, with human capital representing a 
large proportion of total wealth.
 ■The peak accumulation phase  typically begins during the ages of 50–60, 
when most people have reached maximum earnings and have the greatest 
opportunity for wealth accumulation. During this phase, individuals may 
accumulate funds for other goals and objectives, but retirement income 
planning and minimizing taxes are usually the primary focus.
 ■The pre-retirement phase  consists of the few years preceding the planned 
retirement age, usually around 65 years of age. It is typically an individual’s 
maximum career income and highest point of wealth accumulation. For 
those forced to retire due to injury or unemployment, this time may involve 
changing expectations and adapting to a lifestyle more commensurate with 
their wealth.
 ■The early retirement phase  is the most active period of retirement and is 
when an individual is less likely to suffer from cognitive or mobility limita -
tions. Even in retirement, it is important to continue taking an appropriate 
level of investment risk in portfolios to ensure asset growth.
 ■The late retirement phase  is a complex phase because of its unknown dura -
tion. This uncertainty is known as longevity risk , the risk that an individual 
outlives their financial resources in retirement. Cognitive decline and phys -
ical activity and mobility limitations can present risks as well as concerns 
about the need for long-term health care and the need to care for disabled 
children.
The earlier part of the reading discussed the role of entrepreneurship in wealth 
creation. The case study below offers a perspective on how wealth managers can sup -
port social entrepreneurs throughout their professional and personal lives.
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 233
CASE STUDY
Saffron Threads: How Wealth Managers Support 
Entrepreneurs throughout Their Life Cycle
Arya is a 28-year-old social entrepreneur who decides to move to a Southeast 
Asian country to launch a sustainable clothing business, Saffron Threads. The 
business focuses on producing inclusive-size clothing that is environmentally 
conscious, while also empowering and educating rural women from margin -
alized communities.
To start her business, Arya receives initial seed capital from her family, as well 
as funds secured from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
and the International Finance Corporation (IFC). Arya’s wealth manager, M.N. 
Thaler, a leading Swiss wealth management firm, through their network of spe -
cialized financial service providers helped her receive crucial financial advice 
on managing the seed capital, investing in the business, and mitigating risks.
As Arya’s business grows, her wealth also increases, reaching CHF5 million. 
M.N. Thaler advises Arya to diversify her portfolio and raise additional capital 
for business expansion.
During Arya’s peak accumulation phase in her early 50s, Saffron Threads 
employs hundreds of women, and Arya’s wealth grows to CHF15 million. M.N. 
Thaler assists Arya with approaches that optimize her tax exposure and coor -
dinates employee benefits with her investment and retirement plans.
As Arya enters the pre-retirement phase, her wealth has grown to CHF50 
million. This is after selling her business to a private equity firm affiliated with 
M.N. Thaler. They ensure that the proceeds from the sale are invested wisely, 
considering Arya’s long-term financial goals and retirement plans.
In the early retirement phase, Arya purchases a vineyard in Australia and 
runs it alongside a restaurant while supporting and empowering women and 
minorities through her new ventures. Together with M.N. Thaler, Arya explores 
various impact investing opportunities in Australia, identifying investments 
that not only generate returns but also make a positive impact on society and 
the environment.
In the late retirement phase, M.N. Thaler continues to manage Arya’s financial 
resources. They consider the impact of cognitive decline and the potential need 
for long-term health care, adjusting Arya’s investment portfolio and financial 
strategies accordingly.
Throughout Arya’s entrepreneurial journey, M.N. Thaler has been a crucial 
partner in her financial life cycle, providing tailored services and advice at each 
stage of her wealth accumulation, business growth, and eventual retirement. 
Together, they demonstrate the power of impact investing in creating both finan -
cial and social returns, contributing to a more sustainable and equitable future.
Exhibit 21  shows the stylized relationship between the different stages of life and 
the economic wealth of the individual.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 234
Exhibit 21: Wealth Accumulation across the Seven Financial Stages of Life
Education
(0–25)Early Career
(25–35)Critical planning phase
AccumulationTotal wealth
Single Married Married with children and family RetirementDeaccumulation and distributionCareer
Development
(35–50) Peak
accumulation
(50–60) Pre-
retirement
(60–65)Early
retirement
(65–75) Late
Retirement
(75–… ) 
The wealth of an individual changes throughout one’s lifetime, as does the underlying 
asset composition: financial wealth is accumulated as human capital declines. As 
human capital declines, consumption needs are increasingly met using accumulated 
financial, real, and personal assets.
The Economic Value of the Individual
Applying a traditional balance sheet view to quantify an individual’s assets and lia -
bilities fails to consider two important components: the value of human capital and 
the present value of future consumption needs.
An individual’s economic balance sheet , or holistic extended family balance sheet, 
more comprehensively represents the assets available to fund life-cycle consumption, 
to preserve wealth, and to transfer wealth during their lifetime and at death. In this 
context, surplus  replaces the concept of net worth in the economic balance sheet. It 
is the difference between the assets including human capital and liabilities including 
future consumption.
As Exhibit 22  shows, it supplements the traditional balance sheet with the net 
present value of an individual’s expected future earnings and the present value of future 
consumption. This is particularly important when human capital is a significant share 
of the individual’s overall wealth or when pension assets are considerable.
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 235
Exhibit 22: Economic Balance Sheet
Real Asset sSurplus
Short -term deb t
(Credit car d, taxes)
Long-t erm deb t
(House, education)PV of f uture
consumption
Bequest sPersonal Asset s
Human Capital
Financial Asset s
ASSETS LIABILITIES
KNOWLEDGE CHECK: COMPARING FINANCIAL AND HUMAN 
CAPITAL
1. Describe human capital and financial capital.
Solution:
Human capital is an implied asset commonly defined as the mortali -
ty-weighted net present value of an individual’s future expected labor 
income. Financial capital is explicit assets that include the tangible and 
intangible assets (outside of human capital) owned by an individual or 
household. For example, a home, a car, stocks, bonds, a vested retirement 
portfolio, and money in the bank are all examples of an individual’s financial 
capital (or financial assets).
An economic balance sheet quantifies the optimal level of future consumption given 
nonconsumption goals and the individual’s financial and other resources. This form of 
balance sheet allows an individual to anticipate how available resources can be used 
in the future to maximize the expected utility of future consumption. Human capital 
is calculated as the present value of future income streams adjusted by the actuarial 
probability of survival, wage growth, and a discount rate that reflects occupational 
income risk, as Equation 1  shows:
  H  C  0   =  ∑ t=1  N      p ( s  t  )   w  t−1   (1 +  g  t  )   ____________     (1 +  r  f   + y)    t     (1)
where
 p (st) = the probability  of surviving to year (or age)  t
 wt-1 = the income from employment  in period  t-1
 gt = the annual wage growth rate
 rf = the nominal risk-free rate
 y = risk premium associated  with occupational  income volatility
 N = the length of working life in years
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 236
Human capital calculations in Equation 1  quantify wealth from all future earnings, 
wt - 1(1 + gt), an individual is expected to receive over their working lifetime, discounted 
to its current value, (1 + rf + y)t. The actuarial probability of survival, p(st), refers to 
the likelihood that an individual will live to a certain age, based on mortality tables 
and statistical models. Mortality p(st) is the probability of surviving to a given year 
(or age). The risk adjustment, y, based on occupational income volatility recognizes 
the fact that the income from different professions can vary significantly. Specifically, 
the overall stability of labor income for government workers and teachers is different 
from investment bankers and race car drivers. Moreover, it considers the inherent 
stability of the income stream as well as the possibility that the income stream will 
be interrupted by job loss, disability, or death that may be completely unrelated to 
the type of employment.
Human capital calculations quantify wealth, but the reality is more complicated 
than models. Income levels and growth rates, nominal risk-free rates, specific risk 
adjustments, and mortality can be modeled but are not easily estimated. The case 
study below computes human capital for a young professional in the early days of 
employment.
CASE STUDY
Taylor: Estimating Human Capital
Taylor is the hypothetical example of an early career individual used in the first 
case study from this reading. This example will illustrate how the relative value 
of various household assets changes over a lifetime. Taylor is 25 years old and 
just entered the workforce.
Taylor’s initial salary is EUR20,000, which is expected to increase by 1.5% 
annually in real terms (inflation assumption is 2%) over the planned trajectory 
of 40 years, making the nominal growth rate, g, equal to approximately 3.5%, or, 
more specifically, 3.53% (i.e., (1.015) x (1.02) – 1). Since the choice of the career 
path generates a stable income flow, the income volatility is expected to be 1%. 
Taylor has no initial financial capital but designates 5% of the annual income 
into investment and savings.
 
Human capital Financial capital Total capital0100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000600,000700,000
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80WEALTH
AGE
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 237
Considering a retirement age of 65 years and 15-year life expectancy beyond 
that (to 80) with an annual withdrawal of 10% of the available financial capital, 
the pattern of human capital used is calculated as:
 
 
Age Human capital Financial capital Total capital
25 636,156 927 637,082
30 618,751 6,346 625,097
35 589,338 13,288 602,626
40 545,442 22,083 567,524
45 484,421 33,112 517,533
50 403,856 46,795 450,651
55 302,031 63,577 365,609
60 177,905 83,939 261,844
65 31,720 108,372 140,092
70 - 76,003 76,003
75 - 53,302 53,302
80 - 37,382 37,382
 
Human capital starts high and declines over time, while financial capital begins 
to accumulate during the working years. The table above provides annual esti -
mates of human capital, financial capital, and total capital. At the start of the 
year when Taylor turns 25, the human capital is EUR636,156, financial capital 
amounts to EUR927, and the total capital equals EUR637,082. At the beginning 
of the year when Taylor turns 65 (or at the conclusion of Taylor’s 64th year), the 
human capital value decreases to EUR31,720. However, the financial capital is 
EUR108,372, making the total capital amount to EUR140,092.
For the typical individual, the financial capital, or investment portfolio, rep -
resents a significant portion of wealth at the beginning of age 65, or retirement. 
The financial capital is often capital accumulated directly by the individual; a 
substantive proportion can be retirement savings, which may be self-directed 
or secured through an employer or a government run pension system. Private 
wealth management focuses on managing this financial capital.
As individuals progress through their lives, the value of their financial and other 
investments becomes more significant, particularly as they approach retirement. At 
this point, people tend to rely more on their investment portfolio to provide them with 
income in retirement. However, once individuals retire, the relative importance of their 
investment portfolio typically decreases. Instead, the remaining mortality-weighted 
net present value of benefits, such as pension benefits and the value of real estate 
such as their personal residence, become more crucial factors in determining their 
financial situation in retirement.
The mortality-weighted net present value of benefits is the total expected value of 
future retirement benefits adjusted for the likelihood of surviving to each future year 
of receipt and the time value of money. This calculation reflects the probability that 
individuals will live long enough to receive their retirement benefits and the potential 
impact of inflation on the value of those benefits. Meanwhile, the value of real estate 
can be a significant determinant of financial stability in retirement. For example, 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 238
individuals can use the value of their personal residence to generate additional income 
by downsizing to a less expensive home or borrowing against the capital built up over 
the years through reverse mortgages, equity release mortgages, or similar products.
The case study below provides an example in which Taylor’s total capital accu -
mulation is estimated with some more realistic conditions: it includes investment in 
a primary residence and the existence of a pension system. These two are often the 
greatest sources of an individual’s total wealth.
CASE STUDY
Taylor: Estimating Total Capital with Investments 
and Pensions
Expanding on the previous example, Taylor’s purchases a home at age 30 that 
equals twice the annual income at that age, putting 5% of the value of the home 
as equity and borrowing the balance over 30 years. The real estate increases in 
value by 1% annually in real terms. Additionally, Taylor is also the beneficiary 
of a simple defined benefit pension plan that accumulates each year at 10% of 
income paid by the employer. The pension payments vest after 10 years. The 
pension payments during the decumulation phase will be adjusted for inflation.
With these changes, the human wealth is changed as well; more specifically, 
the trajectory is impacted by the purchase of a home and the accumulation of 
pension wealth.
  
–100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000600,000700,000
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
Human capital Financial capital Real estate
Pension wealth Total wealth
The change in relative wealth across the lifetime demonstrates the importance 
of real estate and pensions as a source of total wealth.
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 239
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
Human capital Financial capital Real estate Pension wealth0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
The table below provides annual estimates of human capital, financial capital, 
real estate value, pension wealth, and total capital.
 
 
AgeHuman 
capitalFinancial 
capitalReal 
estatePension 
wealth Total wealth
25 636,156 927 0 0 637,082
30 618,751 6,346 2,032 0 627,129
35 589,338 13,288 8,897 20,158 631,681
40 545,442 22,083 16,458 22,095 606,077
45 484,421 33,112 24,767 24,186 566,486
50 403,856 46,795 33,880 26,363 510,894
55 302,031 63,577 43,860 28,473 437,941
60 177,905 83,939 54,768 30,333 346,945
65 31,720 108,372 66,676 31,722 238,490
70 0 76,003 79,656 24,859 180,518
75 0 53,302 93,787 17,487 164,576
80 0 37,382 109,152 9,692 156,226
 
Pension benefits and real estate investment do not impact Taylor’s human capital 
at 25, which equals EUR637,082. The impact of the pension benefit increases 
Taylor’s total capital when it vests after 10 years of work, at the age of 35. At the 
beginning of the year when Taylor turns 65 (or at the conclusion of Taylor’s 64th 
year), the human capital value decreases to EUR31,720. However, the financial 
capital is EUR108,372, the real estate capital EUR66,676, and pension wealth 
EUR31,722, making the total capital amount to EUR238,490. By allocating 
some of the human capital income to residential real estate, the total capital at 
retirement has increased by the equity value of the residence.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 240
As pension benefits accumulate over time, their relative share increases closer 
to retirement and is expected to compensate for some of the loss of human 
capital that comes with retirement.
There are generally two types of pension systems: defined contribution plans  
and defined benefit plans . In a defined contribution plan, typically the employee, 
the employer, or both contribute to the employee’s account. The employee assumes 
investment risk, and the final benefit is based on the performance of their investments. 
In contrast, in a defined benefit plan, the employer guarantees a monthly retirement 
benefit based on factors such as the employee’s years of service, salary, and age. The 
employer is responsible for funding the plan and bears the investment risk to ensure 
there are enough assets to pay the benefits. Most public pension systems are defined 
benefit plans for which the government determines the benefit levels and bears the 
investment risk. The stability and predictability of defined benefit plans can reduce 
the incentive for individuals to save for retirement, as they may rely solely on their 
pension benefits.
Educational attainment and choice of career alternatives determine the value of 
human capital. An individual choosing a more lucrative, well-paying career or choosing 
entrepreneurship may realize a higher human capital. The case study below looks at 
the benefits of successful entrepreneurship, which is one of the main sources of wealth 
that is being created, and human capital.
CASE STUDY
Taylor: Entrepreneurship and Human Capital
Expanding on the previous examples, let us assume that Taylor decides to pur -
sue a different career path: entrepreneurship. In exchange for a lower and more 
stable income stream from full time employment, Taylor, as an entrepreneur, 
expects to accumulate greater wealth at the expense of greater certainty and 
income stability.
This higher expected value and income volatility influences the aggregate 
wealth accumulation through greater estimated cash flows and higher discount 
rates and thus influences the value of human capital. The business grows rapidly 
and steadily. And, instead of retiring at age 65, Taylor sells the business and rolls 
over the proceeds into financial capital to use together with other accumulated 
pension wealth to finance consumption during the remainder of life. With these 
changes, total wealth is changed, as well.
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 241
Entrepreneurship Human capital
Real estateFinancial capital
Pension wealth Total wealth–200,000400,000600,000800,0001,000,0001,200,000
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85
Human capital Financial capital Entrepreneurship Real estate Pension wealth
The proportion of pension wealth as a component of total wealth declines, 
and the considerable financial wealth that comes from the liquidation of the 
entrepreneurial activities continues to increase in value throughout the life.
For affluent individuals, pension wealth usually constitutes a small portion of 
their total wealth portfolio during retirement. The proportion of pension wealth in 
an individual’s overall wealth portfolio depends on their unique circumstances. For 
instance, a 45-year-old full-time employee with EUR5 million in human capital, EUR1 
million in pension benefits, and EUR1 million in financial assets will have different 
investment options compared to a 45-year-old entrepreneur with EUR10 million in 
human capital invested in their business, EUR1 million in pension benefits, and EUR1 
million in financial assets.
The full-time employee’s human capital is linked to their salary income, which is 
generally stable and predictable, while the entrepreneur’s human capital is tied to their 
business, which has more uncertain and unpredictable cash flows. The volatility and 
growth of income in human capital calculations seeks to account for this difference. 
To diversify their human capital, pension benefits, and financial assets, individuals 
mainly have control over how their financial portfolios are invested and allocated. 
Consequently, during the accumulation phase, they should seek to allocate their 
investment portfolio to diversify their income and risk from human capital.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 242
During the accumulation phase, a full-time employee with stable salary income 
should have an investment portfolio that balances the relative stability of their salary 
income and human capital through higher allocations to equities. In contrast, an 
entrepreneur’s income from their business is more volatile and often more exposed to 
risks of a particular industry or sector, so their investment portfolio allocation should 
reflect these differences in risk and have a strong fixed-income allocation and, perhaps, 
relatively greater exposure to industries less correlated with their human capital.
This also has implications for the decumulation phase. For instance, in 20 years’ 
time, the now 65-year-old retired employee and 65-year-old retired entrepreneur 
from the previous example will have different spending patterns throughout the rest 
of their lives. The retired employee, who has EUR4 million in wealth split evenly 
between financial wealth and pension wealth, will have different options compared to 
the retired entrepreneur, who possesses EUR40 million in financial wealth and EUR2 
million in pension wealth. The retired employee will depend on their pension wealth, 
which needs to generate income for the remainder of their lifetime. As a result, their 
portfolio must both produce income and maintain purchasing power.
On the other hand, the pension wealth makes up a smaller portion of the entre -
preneur’s total wealth and therefore has limited influence on their ability to maintain 
their post-retirement spending for the rest of their life. Generally, pension wealth 
represents a low percentage of the total wealth portfolio for wealthier individuals 
during retirement. The focus of their portfolio allocation may be less about generating 
income to cover costs in their retirement years and more about fulfilling philanthropic 
goals, transferring wealth to future generations, and achieving other long-term finan -
cial objectives.
Individuals will need to consider means to safeguard the value of their pension 
wealth as part of the financial planning process. For example, a pension plan from a 
private employer may be impacted by company-specific risk, just like an entrepreneur’s 
personal wealth is linked to their business. A private pension plan can be terminated, 
and a government backed public pension system can face shortfalls that cannot be met 
through increased taxes and contributions, all of which that can imperil the likelihood 
of repayment. The broad risk of insolvency is a significant concern that could lead to 
the loss of the benefits from an employer-based pension plan or an entrepreneur’s 
financial wealth.
To reduce this risk from such equity-like or equity-linked sources of wealth, such 
as from a privately held business, investments in fixed-income instruments can be a 
viable option. However, this involves a trade-off between higher yet volatile returns 
and lower yet safer returns. Individuals need to determine whether this aligns with 
their financial objectives.
While the investment portfolio holds substantial importance for the typical indi -
vidual at age 65 or retirement, it still represents less than 50% of the total economic 
wealth when considering other factors such as home equity, pension wealth, and 
human capital. As individuals move through retirement and spend their funds, the 
investment portfolio’s relative share decreases. The remaining mortality-weighted net 
present value of benefits and real estate value, such as the individual’s home, become 
the primary factors determining their financial situation during retirement.
While human capital calculations provide a framework for quantifying wealth, it is 
important to note that reality is more complex than models. For instance, estimating 
income levels and growth rates, nominal risk-free rates, specific risk adjustments, 
and mortality can be challenging. Particularly in the early stages of the life cycle, the 
potential loss of human capital is a significant risk factor.
Life-Cycle View of Human Capital 243
QUESTION SET 2
1. Contrast performance measurement and the definition of risk for 
institutional investors and the typical individual investor.
Solution:
Institutional investors measure performance relative to defined indices or 
benchmarks, while individual investors assess performance based on the at -
tainment of specific financial goals. For an institutional investor, a portfolio 
underperforms if its performance is less than the stated index or set bench -
mark. Institutional investors define risk with quantitative measures, such as 
volatility, beta, and so on. For an individual investor, a portfolio underper -
forms if the performance does not sufficiently meet a set goal. Individual 
investors define risk by the likelihood and consequences of failing to meet 
specific financial goals. Hence, risk and performance are closely linked.
2. Which of the following statements accurately characterizes the comparison 
between developed and emerging financial markets based on the given text?
A. Both developed and emerging markets offer a similar array of invest -
ment opportunities and regulatory support for investments.
B. Developed markets offer larger active financial markets and more 
stringent regulatory support compared to emerging markets.
C. Emerging markets typically offer more diverse investment alternatives 
and better access to high quality financial information than developed 
markets.
Solution:
B is the correct response. Developed markets offer a wider range of invest -
ment alternatives and have a more stringent regulatory framework. This 
allows for a broader spectrum of investment choices and promotes trust in 
the financial system, offering investors a unique advantage for long-term 
wealth accumulation.
Both statements A and C are incorrect. Developed markets offer a larger 
variety of investment opportunities and more robust regulatory support 
than emerging markets. Developed markets also offer better access to 
high-quality financial information. Also, emerging markets are character -
ized by a more limited array of investment alternatives compared to devel -
oped markets.
3. At what stage of the wealth life cycle does accumulated or total wealth typi -
cally achieve its maximum level?
A. Peak accumulation
B. Pre-retirement
C. Early retirement
Solution:
B is the correct response. Pre-retirement years (typically from age 60–65) 
should be the period in which wealth reaches its maximum. Answer A is not 
correct, as wealth continues to grow during the peak accumulation years, 
and answer C is not correct, as the period of wealth deaccumulation begins 
at early retirement.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 244
4. Contrast the most appropriate portfolio allocations to equities and fixed-in -
come securities for the following two individuals in the accumulation phase 
of their wealth life cycles: an individual who works in a government job with 
stable income characteristics, and an individual who is pursuing an entre -
preneurial career.
Solution:
The individual working in a government job with stable income character -
istics is likely to allocate more to risky equity securities in their portfolio 
allocation as compared to the individual pursuing an entrepreneurial career. 
The entrepreneur’s riskier future income stream is likely to cause a larger 
allocation to fixed-income securities as compared to the individual pursuing 
a government career with a less risky future income stream.
INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS: RETURN, RISK, AND OTHER 
OBJECTIVES AND CONSTRAINTS
justify how returns, risks, objectives, and constraints for individuals 
relate to their human and financial capital
Nominal and Inflation-Adjusted Returns
For long-term individual investors, especially those saving for retirement, safeguarding 
their long-term purchasing power is more crucial than focusing solely on nominal 
returns. By considering purchasing power–adjusted returns, investors can make 
well-informed decisions about their investments and ensure that their financial objec -
tives are achieved. The influence of inflation on investment returns can differ based 
on the investment horizon, and neglecting it may result in inaccurate conclusions 
about an investment’s performance.
The fact that inflation diminishes the purchasing power of capital has significant 
consequences for investment management, portfolio construction, and purchasing 
power adjusted wealth accumulation. In the short term, inflation reduces purchasing 
power, affecting the value of returns and principal investments. Rising inflation rates 
can hinder individual investors’ ability to invest effectively. Over the long term, the 
impact of inflation compounds, potentially leading to a significant decrease in the real, 
purchasing power– adjusted value of investments and potentially impeding individu -
als’ capacity to accumulate enough wealth to meet their long-term financial goals or 
needs. For those in the decumulation phase who depend on their accumulated capital 
as their primary income source, investment returns that do not outpace inflation will 
result in a decline in their purchasing power. To protect against inflation, investors 
usually consider assets such as equities, real estate, and commodities, which have 
historically produced returns that surpass long-term inflation rates.
It is important to distinguish between beating inflation and hedging against infla -
tion. Assets like equities over long periods tend to provide a return that outpaces 
inflation: the average annual return of the stock market over the past several decades 
has generally outperformed inflation. Equities perform especially well in real terms 
when inflation is low. However, equities can be quite volatile in the short term, and their 
returns may not outpace increasing or persistent inflation. Additionally, commodities, 4
Individual Investors: Return, Risk, and Other Objectives and Constraints 245
such as oil and gold, can see their prices outperform during inflationary periods but 
can also be seen to contribute to increased inflation. Hence, investing in these assets 
could be, at least for shorter periods, considered as a hedge against inflation. However, 
they do not always outperform persistent inflation, and their prices can, at times, be 
quite volatile.
Inflation-protected bonds issued by governments link the return to inflation and 
are designed to keep pace with inflation. Despite the existence of such inflation-linked 
bonds , most fixed-income instruments are not inflation linked. Additionally, real 
estate can serve as a hedge against inflation because the value of properties tends 
to rise over time along with the general price level. As inflation leads to a general 
increase in prices, the price of real estate often increases, as landlords may increase 
rents over time to keep up with inflation. This increasing income stream can keep 
pace with rising prices, but that is not always the case. Real estate prices can some -
times stagnate or even decrease during inflationary periods because of factors such 
as general economic uncertainty.
Risks
Individual investors face different types of risks that can affect their investment out -
comes such as asset price and return volatility, drawdown risk, and the risk of not 
achieving financial objectives.
 ■Return volatility refers to the fluctuations in the value and returns of an 
investment over time and captures the likelihood that an investment may 
decline in value because of changes in market conditions, economic factors, 
or company-specific events. It impacts all asset classes.
 ■Drawdown risk is the risk of experiencing losses because of a decline in the 
value of an investment over a specific period and is the difference between 
the investment’s peak value and its lowest point during a market downturn. 
This can be material either when an investor benchmarks the portfolio 
against achieving a certain financial goal and objective, or when an investor 
is forced to realize a loss. An investor who buys an exchange-traded fund 
(ETF) for ZAR90,000 that subsequently increases in value to ZAR100,000 
and then drops in value to ZAR80,000 experiences a drawdown of 
ZAR20,000. A drawdown is not a realized loss; rather, it is a decline in value, 
a paper loss. A realized loss would only occur if the investor sold the ETF or 
if the ETF were used as collateral for a loan and there were suddenly a col -
lateral shortfall that the investor could not address. The investor would then 
be forced to liquidate the asset to remain compliant with the loan covenants.
 ■The risk of not achieving financial objectives refers to the possibility that an 
investor will not achieve their planned financial goals because of a combi -
nation of possible factors including return shortfalls, market environment, 
and economic conditions, or because the investor did not dedicate enough 
capital to meet the goals.
Investors can reduce the impact of volatility and drawdown risk by diversifying 
across a range of different asset classes. All investors should review and adjust their 
investment strategies, portfolios, and asset allocations regularly, but it is particularly 
important for individual investors for whom the inherent risk is not achieving set 
financial objectives. For individual investors, inflation is a critical factor to consider 
when assessing the risk of not achieving financial objectives — meeting income needs. 
Purchasing power–adjusted returns also affect the volatility of an investment, as changes 
in inflation rates can impact market conditions and asset values and may also affect 
drawdown risk, as inflation can reduce the inflation-adjusted value of an investment.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 246
Evaluating a private client’s risk tolerance is a key step in the information-gathering 
process. The term risk tolerance usually describes a set of risk-related concepts. The 
following are some key terms used in this context:
 ■Risk tolerance  refers to the level of risk an individual is willing and able to 
bear. Differently put, risk tolerance is the willingness to engage in a risky 
behavior in which possible outcomes can be negative. Risk tolerance is 
related to risk aversion , which is the degree of an investor’s unwillingness  to 
take risk.
 ■Risk capacity  is the ability to bear financial risk. The key difference between 
risk capacity and risk tolerance is that risk capacity is more objective in 
nature, while risk tolerance relates to an attitude. Risk capacity is deter -
mined by the client’s wealth, income, investment time horizon, liquidity 
needs, and other relevant factors. Clients with greater risk capacity can 
tolerate greater financial losses without compromising current or future 
consumption goals.
 ■Risk perception is the subjective assessment of the risk involved in the 
outcome of an investment decision. Unlike risk tolerance, risk perception — 
how a client perceives the riskiness of an investment decision or the invest -
ment climate — depends on the circumstances involved. Consequently, a 
wealth manager can help shape a client’s risk perception. Risk perception 
varies considerably across individuals.
In practice, wealth managers often utilize questionnaires to assess clients’ risk 
tolerances. The result of a risk tolerance questionnaire, typically a numerical score, 
is often used as an input in the investment planning process. The questionnaire in 
Exhibit 23  provides some common types of questions that may be found on a risk 
tolerance questionnaire.
Exhibit 23: Sample Questions from a Risk Tolerance Questionnaire
1. When you make investment decisions, on which of the following do 
you tend to focus?
a. Always on the potential for gain
b. Usually on the potential for gain
c. Always on the potential for loss
d. Usually on the potential for loss
2. Compared to your friends and family, are you:
a. less willing to take risk?
b. equally willing to take risk?
c. more willing to take risk?
3. What potential percentage decline in your investment portfolio value 
over a one-year period are you willing to experience?
a. 5%
b. 10%
c. 20%
d. 30%
e. More than 30%
4. Which of the following statements best describes your attitude about 
the performance of your investment portfolio over the next year?
Individual Investors: Return, Risk, and Other Objectives and Constraints 247
a. I can tolerate a substantial loss.
b. I can tolerate a loss.
c. I can tolerate a small loss.
d. I would have a hard time tolerating a loss of any magnitude.
5. Suppose that you have made an investment that, because of a sudden 
broad market decline, has declined in price by 25%. Which of the fol -
lowing actions would you take?
a. Sell all of the investment
b. Sell a portion of the investment
c. Hold the investment (take no action)
d. Buy more of the investment
6. Suppose that you have access to two types of investments: one invest -
ment with low risk and low expected return and one with high risk 
and high expected return. Which of the following portfolio mixes 
would you select?
a. 100% low risk/low return
b. 75% low risk/low return and 25% high risk/high return
c. 50% low risk/low return and 50% high risk/high return
d. 25% low risk/low return and 75% high risk/high return
e. 100% high risk/high return
7. Suppose that you are offered employment that involves the choice of a 
fixed salary, variable compensation that could be higher or lower than 
the fixed salary, or some mix of the two. Which of the following would 
you choose?
a. Entirely fixed salary
b. Mostly fixed salary
c. Entirely variable compensation
d. Mostly variable compensation
e. An equal mix of the two
8. Which of the following best characterizes the time horizon for your 
primary investment goal?
a. Less than 3 years
b. 3 to 8 years
c. 9 to15 years
d. 16 to 20 years
e. Greater than 20 years
Risk tolerance questionnaires have limitations. It is also unclear if they can accu -
rately predict investor behavior. Relying solely on the results of such questionnaires to 
recommend investments or asset allocations for a client demands significant judgment 
and inevitably involves some guesswork by wealth managers. Academic research sug -
gests that client questionnaires are highly subjective, which can lead to the manager’s 
own risk perceptions influencing investment decision making on behalf of clients. 
Furthermore, studies have shown that the sequence and structure of questions can 
directly affect the responses.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 248
The way losses are presented, either as a percentage (relative loss) or a currency 
amount (absolute loss), can result in different responses from the same person. 
Moreover, a question involving a small absolute loss on a smaller portfolio might 
elicit a different reaction compared to a question involving a large absolute loss on a 
larger portfolio, even if the relative losses are identical.
Risk tolerance conversations, which are more difficult to conduct than adminis -
tering questionnaires, are more suitable for higher net worth clients and can yield 
valuable insights into the individual’s risk tolerance, such as
 ■How much are the client’s financial decisions influenced by friends or family 
members?
 ■What financial experiences have shaped the client’s perspective? Individuals 
who lived through deep recessions, even in childhood, may bring that per -
spective to present-day investment decisions.
 ■What are the client’s past (notable) investment mistakes and (celebrated) 
successes?
 ■What are the sources of the client’s investment wealth? Individuals could 
achieve wealth through saving, investments, speculation, inheritance, busi -
ness activities, a liquidity event (such as selling a privately held business), 
substantial real estate holdings, other less liquid assets (such as collectibles), 
or a combination of these various sources.
 ■How does the client evaluate investment risk? Individuals can think about 
investment losses in absolute or percentage terms.
Risk tolerance discussions enable wealth managers to educate clients about invest -
ment risks. A wealth manager may present a client with an array of portfolio options, 
each having different expected returns and expected levels of volatility. The client’s 
selection from these options offers insights into their risk tolerance. This process is 
dynamic, as educating the client and gathering their feedback can reveal valuable 
information about their investment approach that may not be apparent from a risk 
tolerance questionnaire or a personality type assessment. Additionally, the dynamic 
aspect of risk tolerance conversations offers the client opportunities to learn about 
the complexities of investing and the associated risks.
Objectives
To this point, we have discussed a client’s overall risk tolerance. Because clients often 
have multiple goals or objectives, their risk tolerance may vary for different goals. 
For example, a client may have a low risk tolerance with respect to larger near-term 
goals but a higher risk tolerance when it comes to longer-term goals. A challenge for 
wealth managers in managing client relationships is to satisfactorily address potentially 
conflicting risk tolerance levels.
Wealth managers assist their customers in formulating, prioritizing, and imple -
menting their financial objectives, which may span a range of needs and desires, 
through goal prioritization and the implementation of investment strategies. Rather 
than being a one-time exercise, identifying client goals is an ongoing communication 
between wealth manager and client.
 ■Planned goals  are those financial objectives that can be reasonably esti -
mated or quantified at the onset and can be achieved within an expected 
time horizon. Such planned goals typically include retirement, specific 
purchases such as a primary residence, vehicle, or luxury item, family events 
such as weddings, education such as college or professional education, 
wealth transfer through gifts and bequests, and philanthropy.
Individual Investors: Return, Risk, and Other Objectives and Constraints 249
 ■Unplanned goals  are those related to unforeseen financial needs, and as 
such they are more difficult to quantify than planned goals because either 
the funding need or the timing of the financial need or both may not be esti -
mated. Such unplanned goals typically include unexpected expenses such 
as property repairs that insurance may not cover fully, medical expenses 
not covered by the health care system or medical insurance, and similar 
expenses.
Planning for goals is among the more challenging areas of a client’s financial profile, 
as they are sometimes poorly articulated. By quantifying goals, prioritizing goals, and 
adjusting to changing goals, wealth managers directly assist clients in identifying these 
financial objectives. For instance, the manager may conclude that a client’s clearly stated 
retirement goals are unfeasible based on their assessment. In this case, the manager 
has the chance to develop specific, more realistic, and achievable client goals, which 
can further help the client quantify each goal and develop appropriate plans.
Wealth managers also assist clients with setting priorities when they have multiple 
parallel and conflicting objectives, such as launching a new business, purchasing a 
second home, and retiring to Provence, as illustrated in the case study below. A wealth 
manager should conduct periodic reviews of the client’s financial circumstances, 
including their financial goals, in order to modify an investment strategy if there is 
any significant change in the goals and circumstances.
CASE STUDY
C.Y. Lee: Client Goals
Mr. C.Y. Lee is a managing director for the investment firm Acme & Bass, 
which is located in the Asia-Pacific region. Lee is 40 years old, is married, and 
has two children, ages 12 and 10. He and his family reside in a home that they 
own in Singapore. In a conversation with his wealth manager, Lee states that 
he wishes to fund the undergraduate tuition for his children to study abroad. 
Lee expects the tuition cost to be approximately GBP40,000 per child per 
year and annual living expenses an additional GBP40,000, or approximately a 
total of GBP640,000. Lee also wishes to fund his children’s weddings at some 
point in the future. Lee also wants to provide for his and his wife’s elderly and 
infirm relatives. Additionally, Lee is also concerned about the future health care 
expenses of his wife’s parents and to what degree he and his wife may need to 
support them financially.
Because the education costs will occur in the next 5–10 years, Mr. Lee states 
that they are his top priority. The secondary goal is to provide financially for 
the welfare of their elderly relatives.
Lee anticipates working until age 65 and does not know how much he and 
his wife will need to fund their retirement lifestyle. He mentions his desire to 
purchase a flat in London and let (rent) it as part of their retirement plan. The 
flat would cost approximately GBP5 million.
Questions:
1. Identify Lee’s planned goals.
Answer:
Lee’s planned goals are (a) funding his children’s education, (b) funding his 
children’s weddings, (c) funding his and his wife’s retirement, (d) purchasing 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 250
and subsequently letting (renting) a flat in London, and e) providing finan -
cially for the welfare of elderly relatives.
2. Identify Lee’s unplanned goals.
Answer:
Lee’s unplanned goals relate to the future health care expenses of his wife’s 
parents, as well as possible uninsured property repairs for the Lee’s Singa -
pore residence and, if purchased, their London flat.
3. Discuss the issue of goal quantification for Lee.
Answer:
Lee has quantified the education funding goal and the flat purchase. He and 
his wealth manager should work to estimate the cost of the weddings for 
Lee’s children, the anticipated retirement lifestyle needs for Lee and his wife, 
and the cost of providing for the welfare of their elderly relatives. Under -
standably, the health care cost quantification may be difficult to achieve.
4. Discuss the issue of goal prioritization for Lee.
Answer:
Lee states that his first priority is education funding for his children. Howev -
er, the timing of a need should not be the sole determinant of goal prior -
ity. If funding their children’s education costs will leave Lee and his wife 
unprepared for retirement, for example, they may wish to reevaluate their 
priorities.
QUESTION SET 3
1. What distinguishes risk tolerance from risk capacity?
Solution:
Risk tolerance focuses on the willingness of the investor to take on risk, and 
if risk is taken on, the appropriate level of compensation is expected for the 
level of risk. Risk capacity focuses on how much investors can put at risk 
without affecting their current or future consumption.
2. Which of the following asset classes is least likely to provide protection 
against inflation?
A. Equity securities
B. Inflation-linked bonds
C. Fixed-income securities
Solution:
C is the correct response. Fixed-income securities, except for infla -
tion-linked bonds, are not considered as providing potential for inflation 
protections. The value of cash flows of fixed-income securities declines, 
in present value terms, as discount rates rise during periods of inflation. 
Because of this feature of fixed-income securities, they likely do not provide 
inflation protection.
Individual Investors: Return, Risk, and Other Objectives and Constraints 251
A is incorrect because equities are noted specifically for their ability to not 
only provide some degree of inflation protection but also to potentially pro -
vide returns that outpace inflation over the long term.
B is incorrect because inflation-linked bonds are structured to provide in -
cremental cash flows that adjust with the inflation rate, so they are likely to 
provide protection against inflation.
3. Differentiate between an asset used as an inflation hedge and an asset that 
outpaces inflation in an investment strategy.
Solution:
An asset used as an inflation hedge protects the purchasing power during 
periods of inflation as their value or returns increase in line with or close to 
the inflation rate. Inflation-linked bonds may protect against inflation, but 
they do not necessarily provide real growth in value. An asset that outpaces 
inflation is expected to not only maintain its value during inflationary peri -
ods but also increase in value at a rate higher than the rate of inflation. Typi -
cally, equities, or stocks, fall into this category; however, this may not always 
be the case. Individual companies and broader market indexes can exhibit 
different behaviors, as some companies can often pass increased costs on to 
consumers during inflationary periods, leading to increased profits and thus 
increased stock prices. However, the overall market performance can lag, 
particularly when inflation is persistently high.
4. An individual investor is assessing three different risky investment portfoli -
os with the following expected characteristics:
 ■Portfolio A has an expected return of 8% with volatility of 20%.
 ■Portfolio B has an expected return of 9% with volatility of 25%.
 ■Portfolio C has an expected return of 10% with volatility of 30%.
The risk-free rate is 4%. This investor can take on the risk associated with 
the highest risk portfolio and has been assessed as having low risk aversion. 
The investor chooses Portfolio A. Which one of the following concepts can 
lead the investor to choose Portfolio A?
A. Risk tolerance
B. Risk capacity
C. Risk perception
Solution:
C is the correct response. Even though each of the portfolios offers the same 
return-to-risk trade-off (Sharpe ratio of each portfolio is 0.2), the investor 
has chosen the portfolio with the lowest risk. This choice implies that the 
investor has a subjective assessment (i.e., perception) that the higher risk 
portfolios are not attractive.
A is incorrect because low risk aversion reflects high risk tolerance. B is 
incorrect because the investor has the capacity to invest in the highest risk 
portfolio.
5. A 40-year-old individual investor meets with a financial advisor and discuss -
es two specific goals: university education for her two children (ages 6 and 
8) and her retirement at age 60. She is very specific with her advisor that her 
children have the financial means to attend a top-tier private university. On 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 252
the other hand, she is willing to accept a wide range of acceptable income 
levels during her retirement. Evaluate this investor’s risk tolerance with 
respect to the two investment objectives discussed with the adviser.
Solution:
This investor is more likely to have lower risk tolerance with respect to 
meeting the goal of funding her children’s future education expenses. Be -
cause she has a very specific type of institution in mind, her tolerance for 
not meeting this objective is likely low. On the other hand, she seems to be 
willing to accept a wide range of possible income levels in retirement, so her 
risk tolerance is likely to be high for this objective.
THE IMPACT OF TAXATION AND INFLATION
evaluate how various types of taxes imposed on individual investors 
and the impact of inflation influence investment decisions
This section focuses on taxes that most directly affect tax planning for investments: 
specifically, taxes on investment income to individuals.
The tax systems in many countries are designed to encourage or discourage certain 
activities through tax incentives. Tax structures vary globally and can change as the 
needs and objectives of the governmental jurisdiction change. As the environment is 
dynamic, investment managers must comprehend the effects of various tax structures 
on investment returns and wealth. Instead of outlining specific country tax rules, this 
reading offers a framework to help managers understand and implement investment 
strategies in a changing environment where dissimilar tax situations may apply to 
different clients and clients’ tax environments may shift over time.
In most tax jurisdictions, a tax rate structure is applied to ordinary income such as 
earnings from employment. Special categories of income, such as investment income 
(sometimes referred to as capital income for tax purposes), may be subject to other 
tax rates. Investment income (e.g., interest, dividends, distributions, or capital gains) 
is frequently taxed differently depending on the type of income and losses.
Exhibit 24  shows a simple and highly generalized schematic of how different 
components of investment returns can be taxed. Some components may be taxed 
as part of ordinary income, while others may be taxed at more advantageous rates. 
Certainly, investment income can also be taxed at a higher rate. Note that countries 
may choose to tax investment income separately from ordinary income and apply 
tax rates different from ordinary income tax rates. For example, as the right side of 
Exhibit 24  shows, dividends could be subject to a reduced tax rate or excluded from 
taxable income altogether.5
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 253
Exhibit 24: Taxation of Investment Income
Ordinary
income taxOrdinary
income taxOrdinary
income taxReduced
income tax
Excluded
from taxReduced
income tax
Excluded
from taxLong-term vs.
short-term rate
Capital losses
Deferred taxInterest
incomeDividend
incomeCapital gainsTax-advantaged
investment income
Interest
incomeDividend
incomeCapital gainsInvestment
income
Taxable investment
income
 ■Investment income  is often taxed based on the nature of the income: inter -
est, dividends, or realized capital gains and losses.
 ■Interest income and dividends  are typically taxed in the year they are 
received or on an annual basis. Some jurisdictions exclude certain types 
of interest income from taxation; others tax dividend income more 
advantageously.
 ■Capital gains tax  is typically triggered when the asset is sold at an appre -
ciated value. Some systems recognize the impact of capital losses, which 
can be used to offset capital gains taxes. Additionally, many systems allow 
for deferring the payment of capital income tax until a later date, which is a 
valuable option for the investor.
Most countries and their tax systems build on a progressive tax rate structure, 
in which higher income levels are taxed at increasingly higher rates. There are some 
countries where the tax system is flat, in which all income is taxed at the same rate 
regardless of the total income earned.
Taxes on Investment Income
Some tax systems tax investment incomes at the tax rates applicable to ordinary 
income (ordinary rates) unless special provisions exist that reduce the tax liability on 
investment income. Other tax systems have separate tax rates for investment income 
and ordinary income.
 ■For interest income , special provisions typically include exemptions for 
specific types of interest income, favorable tax rates, or exclusion amounts 
that allow a limited amount of interest income to be tax free. In some 
jurisdictions, inflation adjustments for fixed-income instruments may not be 
subject to taxation.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 254
 ■For dividend income , special provisions typically include exemptions, special 
tax rates, or exclusions as mentioned for interest income. To address the 
issue of double taxation — since dividends are a distribution of company 
earnings that may have already been taxed — some tax systems (such as 
those in Australia) utilize tax credits. For instance, dividends can be taxed at 
standard rates, but individuals might be entitled to a credit for a portion of 
the taxes paid by the company.
 ■For capital gains , special provisions typically depend on the length of time 
the asset has been held, the type of asset, or other considerations. This form 
of taxation can be highly complex because of the ever-changing rules, rates, 
and exceptions. Generally, long-term gains receive more favorable treatment 
than short-term gains. The minimum holding period for long-term invest -
ments varies across jurisdictions and may also differ among asset classes.
Furthermore, different tax rates may apply to various types of assets. For instance, 
the sale of privately held and publicly traded equities might be taxed at different rates 
even if both positions have identical holding periods. Real estate often has unique 
tax rates compared to other asset classes, especially if the property is the taxpayer’s 
primary residence. Additionally, tax systems may provide lifetime capital gains exemp -
tions for individuals or establish thresholds under which accumulated capital gains 
are not subject to taxation. Finally, capital gains can be offset by capital losses, and 
the rules recognizing capital losses can be quite complex.
The case study below, Nataliia Kozlowska: Tax Rates and Tax Calculations, shows 
the basics of tax calculations commonly applied to ordinary income based on a progres -
sive tax system. In a progressive tax system, the different tax brackets are graduated, 
and the marginal tax rate  is the rate at which the highest level of income is taxed.
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: Tax Rates and Tax 
Calculations
Ms. Nataliia Kozlowska, a new client living in a jurisdiction with a progressive 
tax rate structure, expects to earn a taxable ordinary income of EUR700,000 
this year. She additionally expects to receive investment income: EUR10,000 
in interest income and EUR5,000 in dividend income.
The graduated tax rate structure in her jurisdiction is:
 
 
Taxable income (EUR)Tax on  
column 1Percentage on excess  
over column 1 Over Up to
0 30,000 — 5
30,000 60,000 1,500 10
60,000 90,000 6,000 15
90,000 250,000 13,500 20
250,000 500,000 50,000 30
500,000 1,000,000 150,000 40
1,000,000   400,000 50
 
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 255
Questions:
1. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s marginal tax rate on her ordinary income?
Answer:
The marginal tax rate is the rate applied to the last EUR of income, which is 
the rate applicable to the income level that immediately follows the taxable 
income. In this case, the taxable income is EUR700,000, which falls under 
the next to last income bracket. Therefore, the applicable marginal tax rate 
would be 40%. If the taxable income exceeds EUR1,000,000, the marginal tax 
is 50% (i.e., for each additional unit of income, 50% will be taxed away).
2. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s tax liability and average tax rate on her ordinary 
income?
Answer:
For incomes between EUR500,000 and EUR1,000,000, the tax rate 
is 40%. For the first EUR500,000, the tax is EUR150,000, and for the 
next EUR200,000 the tax rate is 40% x (EUR700,000 – EUR500,000) = 
EUR80,000. The total tax payable is then EUR150,000 + EUR80,000 = 
EUR230,000, and the average tax rate is 32.86%.
3. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s total tax liability and average tax rate if all her 
investment income is taxed at the same rate as her ordinary income?
Answer:
Considering the expected investment income of EUR10,000 in interest 
income and EUR5,000 in dividend income, the total income is EUR715,000. 
For the first EUR500,000 in ordinary income tax, the tax is EUR150,000, and 
for the next EUR215,000, the tax rate is 40% x (EUR715,000 – EUR500,000) 
= EUR86,000. The total tax payable is then EUR150,000 + EUR86,000 = 
EUR236,000. Thus, 33.01% of the total income of EUR715,000 is paid in 
taxes.
4. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s total tax liability if the first EUR5,000 in interest in -
come is excluded from taxation and the remainder is subject to the income 
tax rate and her dividend income is taxed at 15%?
Answer:
In this scenario, the investment income is taxed differently than ordinary 
tax rates, as part of the interest income is excluded from ordinary income 
tax rates and dividend income is taxed at a lower rate than the marginal tax 
rate. Of the total interest income of EUR10,000, EUR5,000 is excluded from 
taxation. This means that the taxable income is reduced from EUR715,000 
to EUR710,000 after accounting for the interest income exclusion. Two 
different tax rates apply to this taxable income.
i. The ordinary income, which comprises the regular income 
(EUR700,000) and the taxable portion of the interest income 
(EUR5,000), is taxed according to the table above. Meanwhile, the 
dividend income of EUR5,000 is subject to a flat tax of 15%.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 256
ii. The ordinary income tax amounts to EUR150,000 for the first 
EUR500,000 and EUR82,000 for the remaining EUR205,000 (includ -
ing the taxed portion of her interest income). This is calculated as 
40% x (EUR705,000 – EUR500,000) = EUR82,000, resulting in a total 
income tax of EUR232,000.
For the dividend income of EUR5,000, there is a 15% tax, equating to 
EUR750. In total, she pays EUR232,000 in ordinary income tax and EUR750 
in investment income tax on the dividends, with a total tax liability of 
EUR232,750. She pays 32.55% of her total income of EUR715,000 in taxes, 
and her taxable income is EUR710,000.
Additionally, there are other important dimensions in tax planning for investments. 
Some countries permit the use of tax deferred savings and retirement accounts that 
typically
 ■delay taxation on investment returns within the account to some later date;
 ■may permit a deduction for contributions to the account that reduce taxable 
income; and
 ■may occasionally permit tax free distributions under certain circumstances.
Finally, there are tax systems that impose a wealth tax on the accumulation of 
wealth. These wealth taxes are usually levied annually, and because they are often 
set as a percentage of the wealth, they function the same way as income taxes do, by 
reducing after-tax returns and accumulations.
The Impact of Accrual Taxes on Investment Returns
Estimating the taxes on investment alternatives allows taxable investors to compare 
returns and wealth accumulations for different types of investments subjected to differ -
ent tax rates and methods of taxation. Accrual taxes  are levied and paid on a periodic 
basis, usually annually. Deferred taxes  can be postponed until some future date.
When investment returns are subject to accrual taxes, the after-tax return is equal 
to the pretax return, R, multiplied by (1 – tx), where tx represents the tax rate appli -
cable to investment income. For simplicity, the investment’s return is entirely taxed 
at a single uniform rate. Then, the amount of money accumulated for each unit of 
currency, invested for T years, assuming that returns (after taxes at rate tx are paid) 
are reinvested at the same rate of return, R, is simply
 FVIFT = [1 + R(1 – tx)]T (2)
Equation 2  is simply the future value interest factor (FVIF) based on an after-tax 
return. Comparing the accumulation with and without the impact of taxes gives the 
tax drag , the negative impact of taxes on an investment’s net returns, reducing the 
overall performance and growth of an investment portfolio.
With accrual taxation, the tax drag on capital accumulation compounds over time. 
By contrast, when taxes on gains are deferred until the end of the investment horizon, 
the tax rate equals the tax drag on capital accumulation, as the case study involving 
Nataliia Kozlowska shows.
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 257
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: Accrual Taxes and Tax Drag
Ms. Nataliia Kozlowska is determining the impact of taxes on her expected 
investment returns and wealth accumulations. Ms. Kozlowska lives in a tax 
jurisdiction with a flat tax rate of 20%, which applies to all types of income and 
is taxed annually. Ms. Kozlowska expects to earn 7% per year on her investment 
over a 20-year time horizon and has an initial portfolio of EUR100,000.
Questions:
1. What is Ms. Kozlowska expected wealth at the end of 20 years?
Answer:
 FVt = EUR100,000  × [1 + R(1 – tx)]T = EUR100,000  × [1 + 0.07(1 – 0.20)]20 
 = EUR297,357.
2. What proportion of potential investment gains was consumed by taxes?
Answer:
Ignoring taxes, FV = EUR100,000 [1 + 0.07]20 = EUR386,968. The dif -
ference between this and the after-tax amount accumulated from above 
is EUR89,611(EUR386,968 – EUR297,357). The proportion of potential 
investment gains consumed by taxes was EUR89,611/EUR286,968 = 31%, 
which is greater than the 20% tax rate. The negative impact of taxes on the 
investment’s net returns reduced the overall performance and growth of 
an investment by 31%. This proportion of potential investment gains is a 
measure of “tax drag” .
As long as taxes can be delayed, the compounding effect of the tax drag can be 
neutralized, which increases long-term accumulation. Moreover, since longer-term 
capital gains can be taxed at a lower rate compared to shorter-term capital gains, 
the longer taxes can be delayed, the lower the loss of the accumulated increase in 
purchasing power.
The size of the tax drag is considerable enough to be a specific factor in making 
investment decisions. Exhibit 25  illustrates the impact of taxes on capital growth for 
various investment horizons and rates of return.
Exhibit 25: Proportion of Potential Investment Growth Consumed by 
Annual Taxes on Return
r(%)Investment horizon in years (n)
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
1 0.30 0.31 0.31 0.32 0.33 0.33 0.34 0.34
2 0.31 0.32 0.33 0.34 0.35 0.36 0.37 0.38
5 0.32 0.35 0.37 0.40 0.43 0.46 0.48 0.51
10 0.34 0.39 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.64 0.68
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 258
r(%)Investment horizon in years (n)
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
12 0.35 0.41 0.47 0.54 0.59 0.65 0.69 0.74
15 0.36 0.44 0.51 0.59 0.65 0.71 0.76 0.80
20 0.38 0.48 0.57 0.66 0.73 0.79 0.84 0.87
Note:  The calculations assume a 30% annual tax rate assessed on investment returns.
According to Exhibit 25 , tax drag has the following effects:
 ■When investment returns are taxed annually, the impact of taxes on capital 
growth is more significant than the nominal annual tax rate suggests.
 ■Over time, the negative consequences of taxes on capital growth compound, 
resulting in a growing gap between pretax and after-tax gains.
 ■As investment returns increase, tax drag also increases, assuming other 
factors remain constant.
 ■Both return and investment horizons have a multiplicative effect on tax drag 
related to future accumulations.
This implies that for fixed-income instruments, for which most or even all invest -
ment returns are subject to annual taxation, the effect of returns on tax drag is more 
substantial for longer investment periods. Moreover, the influence of investment 
horizon is more significant when dealing with higher returns.
The Impact of Deferral of Taxes on Investment Returns
Certain types of investment income, such as capital gains, are subject to deferred taxes. 
Capital gains taxes are typically incurred when an asset is sold, and they are applied 
to the realized gain, which is calculated as the difference between the selling price and 
the basis. In most cases, the basis refers to the initial investment made when acquiring 
the asset. Although it is uncommon for unrealized capital gains to be taxed, it happens 
in some tax jurisdictions. Additionally, tax-advantaged investment accounts can help 
defer capital gains taxes. In these cases, investment returns and income from capital 
gains accumulate for a time without tax drag and are only subject to taxation when 
they are withdrawn from the account.
If the tax on an investment’s return is deferred until the end of its investment 
horizon T and taxed as a capital gain at rate tCG, then the after-tax future accumula -
tion can be represented as
 FVIFCG = (1 + R)T – [(1 + R)T – 1] × tCG
 = (1 + R)T (1 – tCG) + tCG (3)
The term (1 + R)T represents the pretax accumulation. The [(1 + R)T – 1] × tCG 
term is the tax on the capital gain. Viewed differently, (1 + R)T(1 – tCG) represents 
the future accumulation if the entire amount was subjected to tax. Here, the tCG 
term returns the tax of the untaxed cost associated with the initial investment; these 
calculations are explained in detail in the case study on Nataliia Kozlowska’s deferral 
of tax liability.
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 259
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: Deferral of Tax Liability
Assume the same facts as in the previous case study. Ms. Kozlowska invests 
EUR100,000 at 7%. However, the return comes in the form of deferred capital 
gains that are not taxed until the investment is sold in 20 years’ time.
Questions:
1. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth at the end of 20 years?
Answer:
  F  V  CG     =  100, 000    (1 + 0.07 )    20  −   { [  (1 + 0.07 )    20  − 1]  × 0.20 }   
  = 100, 000  [3.8697  −  (2.8697  × 0.20 ) ]   
  = 100, 000  × 3.2958   =  EUR329, 576 
2. What proportion of potential investment gains were consumed by taxes?
Answer:
Ignoring taxes, FV = EUR100,000 × (1 + 0.07)20 = EUR386,968. The dif -
ference between this and the after-tax amount accumulated from above 
is EUR57,392 (EUR386,968 – EUR329,576). The proportion of potential 
investment gains consumed by taxes was EUR57,392/EUR286,968 = 20%. 
This result compares favorably to the potential investment gains consumed 
by taxes in the previous case study, in which 31% of investment gains were 
consumed by taxes.
The deferral of taxes demonstrates that when tax deferrals are available, the per -
centage of potential investment growth consumed by taxes is equal to the tax rate, 
which is lower than the impact of annual taxation. Essentially, the value of capital gain 
tax deferral offsets a portion of tax drag, and both increase with investment return 
and time horizon. For long-term taxable investors, maximizing tax deferrals is an 
essential investment consideration.
While tax drag on after-tax accumulations subject to annual taxes compounds 
over time, the tax drag from deferred capital gains remains a fixed percentage regard -
less of investment return or time horizon. The longer the tax deferral, the lower the 
present value of the tax liability, allowing more capital accumulation to be protected 
from the ravaging effects of taxation. The case study below expands on the example 
of Nataliia Kozlowska and provides a more detailed illustration, emphasizing that 
for long-term taxable investors, maximizing after-tax capital accumulation is a key 
investment consideration.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 260
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: Comparing Taxable 
Investment Alternative with Tax-Deferred 
Investment Alternative
Assume the same facts as in the previous two case studies. Ms. Kozlowska has 
a choice between a taxable investment alternative (i.e., taxed annually) and 
tax-deferred investment alternative.
In the taxable alternative, at the end of the 20-year horizon the initial invest -
ment of EUR100,000 has grown to
  F  V  t   = EUR 100, 000 ×   [1 + 0.07 ×  (1 − 0.20 ) ]    20  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×   [1 + 0.07 × 0.80]    20  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×   (1 + 0.056 )    20  
  = EUR297, 357 
The proportion of potential investment gains consumed by taxes was EUR89,611/
EUR286,968 = 31% (recall that, ignoring taxes, FV = EUR100,000 × (1 + 0.07)20 
= EUR386,968).
In the tax-advantaged alternative, at the end of the 20-year horizon the initial 
investment of EUR100,000 has grown to
  F  V  CG     =  EUR 100, 000  [  (1 + 0.07 )    20  −  [  (1 + 0.07 )    20  − 1]  × 0.20 ]  
  =  EUR 100, 000  [  (1 + 0.07 )    20  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000  [  (1.07 )    20  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000  [3.8697  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000  [3.0958  + 0.20]  
  = EUR329, 576 
The proportion of potential investment gains consumed by taxes was EUR57,394/
EUR286,968 = 20%.
The benefit from the tax deferral leads to an additional EUR32,218 (EUR329,575 
– EUR297,357) investment growth. The tax drag is reduced from 31% to 20%.
One crucial implication of tax deferral value is that investments with deferred 
capital gains taxation can be more tax efficient than those with annual taxed returns 
even if the marginal tax rates applied on both returns are the same. The advantage 
of tax deferral compounds over time. Furthermore, even if deferred capital gains 
or tax-advantaged investments have higher tax rates than annually taxed (accrual) 
investment income, the deferral value can outweigh a lower annually applied tax rate 
over time.
The relative accumulations can be significantly larger when gains can be deferred 
over long time horizons, particularly for high returns. These models assume investors 
earn a fair risk-adjusted return. The benefits of tax deferral, however, can be dimin -
ished or even completely extinguished if investments taxed on an accrual basis offer 
sufficiently large risk-adjusted returns (i.e., pretax alpha). In other words, purchasing 
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 261
securities sufficiently below their intrinsic value (or short selling securities sufficiently 
above intrinsic value) can overcome tax drag even if the investment is taxed heavily 
on an annual basis. For taxable investments with lower returns, there may not be 
benefits from delaying taxes.
Lastly, many tax systems have lower capital gains tax rates compared to other 
investment or ordinary income tax rates, providing a dual benefit for capital gains 
returns. First, there is the tax deferral advantage and a favorable tax rate upon reali -
zation of gains. Second, capital gains tax rates on longer holding periods may receive 
lower tax rates to encourage long-term investments over short-term ones.
The Impact of Basis on Capital Gains
Basis or cost basis  is the original cost of an investment including any additional 
expenses incurred to acquire it and is used to calculate capital gains or losses when 
the asset is sold. In some circumstances, this basis may be increased or decreased. 
For calculating capital gain taxes, the selling price minus the calculated cost basis is 
multiplied with the applicable tax rate.
Often, an asset purchased earlier will have a cost basis differing from the current 
market value. If the asset’s value has increased since its purchase, the cost basis might 
be less than the market value. This cost basis impacts after-tax accumulation, as it sets 
the taxable capital gain. An asset with a low cost basis has an embedded tax liability 
because of potential capital gains tax from selling it today even without considering 
future growth. In contrast, recent investments and cash do not carry this immediate 
tax liability.
If the cost basis is expressed as proportion B of the current market value of the 
investment, then the future after-tax accumulation value can be expressed by simply 
subtracting this additional tax liability from the expression in Equation 3 , or
  FVI  F  CG, B   =   (1 + R)    T  (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG   −  (1 − B)  ×  t  CG   
  =   (1 + R)    T  (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG   B  (4)
This equation resembles Equation 3 , (1 + R)T(1 – tCG) + tCG, and the last term, tCGB, 
represents the after-tax basis at the end of investment horizon.
An investment with an initial low cost basis has a greater current embedded tax 
liability than an investment with a higher cost basis because, if it were liquidated 
today, tax on the embedded gain would be due. Hence, when selling an appreciated 
asset, the potential tax liability must be weighed against the potential for return as 
the case study on Nataliia Kozlowska and the cost basis shows.
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: Cost Basis
Continuing with the facts in this series of case studies, Ms. Kozlowska has 
a current investment with a market value of EUR100,000 and cost basis of 
EUR80,000. The stock price grows at 7% per year for 20 years. The applicable 
tax rate is 20%.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 262
Questions:
1. Express the cost basis as a percent of the current market value.
Answer:
Cost basis/Current market value = B = EUR80,000/ EUR100,000 = 0.80.
2. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth after 20 years?
Answer:
 FVIFCB, G = EUR100,000  × [(1 + 0.07)20(1 – 0.20) + 0.20(0.80)]
 = EUR325,575.
This amount is EUR4,000 smaller than Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth in 
the earlier example about deferral of tax liability (EUR329,575), in which it 
was assumed that the cost basis equaled the current market value.
Inflation
Inflation, which represents the rate at which the general price level for goods and 
services in an economy changes over time, diminishes the future purchasing power 
of money and can impact the composition of the consumption basket throughout 
an individual’s life cycle. Factors such as changes in income, priorities, lifestyle, and 
family dynamics drive these shifts. For instance, younger adults tend to spend more 
on leisure, entertainment, and clothing, whereas retired individuals are more likely 
to allocate their funds towards health-related expenses, housing, and transportation. 
These variations in consumption patterns hold significant implications for long-term 
savings, including retirement planning.
By considering the joint effects of accrual taxes and inflation on long-term wealth 
accumulation, investors can make informed decisions and choose investments that 
offer the most favorable long-term outcomes. Concentrating solely on nominal returns 
can result in a distorted perception of an investment’s real, after-tax, long-term 
performance.
As periodic taxes and inflation gradually erode accumulated capital, then the future 
after-tax inflation-adjusted accumulation on capital, FVIFt,inf, can be calculated as in 
Equation 5 :
  FVI  F  t,infl   =   [  1 + R (1 −  t  X  )  _  1 + infl  ]    T
   (5)
In this equation, the nominal after-tax returns from Equation 2  are reduced by the 
inflation rate. The nominator, 1 + R(1 – tx), is the after-tax return, and the denom -
inator, 1 + infl, is the inflation adjustment. The case study on Nataliia Kozlowska’s 
wealth accumulation considering taxes and inflation demonstrates the joint effects 
of tax and inflation.
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 263
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: The Effects of Tax and 
Inflation on Wealth Accumulation
Continuing with the facts in this series of case studies, Ms. Kozlowska is deter -
mining the impact of inflation and annual taxes on her wealth accumulations. 
Ms. Kozlowska expects to earn a nominal 7% per year on her investment over 
a 20-year time horizon and has an initial portfolio of EUR100,000. The antic -
ipated inflation is 3% annually.
Questions:
1. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected inflation adjusted wealth at the end of 20 
years without the impact of taxes?
Answer:
  F  V  t=0,infl   = EUR 100, 000   [  1 + 0.07  (1 − 0)   ____________   (1 + 0.03 )   ]    T
  
  = EUR 100, 000   [  1.07 _ 1.03  ]    20
  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  1.0388    20  
  = EUR 100, 000 × 2.1411  
  = EUR214, 110 
Ms. Kozlowska’s expected inflation-adjusted wealth at the end of 20 years 
without the impact of taxes is EUR214,110. The purchasing power of 
EUR386,968 in nominal terms and ignoring taxes equals the purchasing 
power of EUR214,110 in real terms ignoring taxes.
2. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected inflation adjusted wealth at the end of 20 
years with the impact of taxes?
Answer:
  F  V  t,infl   = EUR 100, 000   [  1 + 0.07  (1 − 0.20 )   ______________   (1 + 0.03 )   ]    T
  
  = EUR 100, 000   [  1.056 _ 1.03  ]    20
  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  1.0252    20  
  = EUR 100, 000 × 1.6450  
  = EUR164, 500 
Ms. Kozlowska’s expected after-tax inflation-adjusted wealth at the end of 
20 years with the impact of annual taxes is EUR164,500.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 264
3. How much purchasing power have taxes eroded?
Answer:
Taxes eroded the equivalent of EUR49,601 in purchasing power.
4. How much purchasing power would taxes erode if the return were 4% with 
no inflation (i.e., a similar real return to the 7% nominal return and 3% infla -
tion presented earlier)?
Answer:
  F  V  t=0,infl   = EUR 100, 000   [  1 + 0.04  (1 − 0)   ____________   (1 + 0)   ]    20
  = EUR 219, 112 
  F  V  t=0.20,infl   = EUR 100, 000   [  1 + 0.04  (1 − 0.20 )   ______________   (1 + 0)   ]    20
  = EUR187, 756 
In this case, taxes eroded the equivalent of EUR31,356 in purchasing power. 
Although the erosion of purchasing power was less when the nominal 
returns were higher in the above example, the real returns are similar. This 
demonstrates that inflation, in conjunction with taxes, can decrease pur -
chasing power even when there is no change in the real pretax returns.
Adapting Equation 3 , where capital accumulates on a tax-advantaged basis with 
tax assessed on the accumulation upon sale or at liquidation (i.e., deferred capital 
gain), inflation can be incorporated, arriving at the relationship shown in Equation 6 :
  FVI  F  CG, B, infl   =      (1 + R)    T  (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG   B  __________________     (1 + infl)    T     (6)
The inflation adjustment reduces the after-tax value. Taxes are paid in nominal terms 
and not in purchasing power–adjusted values; however, it is the purchasing power of 
the after-tax wealth that is relevant from a wealth management perspective. The case 
study comparing increase in purchasing power of taxable accounts with tax-deferred 
accounts shows the effect of the time horizon, the inflation rate, and the return.
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: Comparing Increases in 
Purchasing Power of Taxable Accounts with Tax-
Deferred Accounts
Continuing with the facts in this series of case studies, Ms. Kozlowska has 
a current investment with a market value of EUR100,000 and cost basis of 
EUR80,000. The stock price grows at 7% per year for 20 years. Inflation is 3%, 
and the applicable tax rate is 20%.
Questions:
1. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth in real, inflation-adjusted, and 
after-tax terms after 20 years?
Answer:
  F  V  CG, B, infl   = EUR 100, 000 [     (1 + R)    T    (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG   B  ___________________     (1 + infl)    T   ]  
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 265
  = EUR 100, 000     (1 + 0.07 )    20   (1 − 0.20 )  + 0.20 × 0.80   __________________________     (1 + 0.03 )    20    
  = EUR 100, 000   1.07   20  × 0.80 + 0.16  _______________   1.03   20    
  = EUR 100, 000 × 1.8027  
  = EUR180, 270. 
This amount is EUR15,770 greater than Ms. Kozlowska’s after-tax, purchas -
ing power–adjusted wealth in the previous case study (EUR 164,500), where 
taxes were applied annually.
2. How would the answer change if the basis were EUR100,000?
Answer:
  F  V  CG, B, infl   = EUR 100, 000 [     (1 + R)    T    (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG   B  ___________________     (1 + infl)    T   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000     (1 + 0.07 )    20  (1 − 0.20 )  + 0.20 × 1   _______________________     (1 + 0.03 )    20    
  = EUR 100, 000   1.07   20  × 0.80  + 0.20  _______________   1.03   20    
  = EUR 100, 000 × 1.8248  = EUR182, 480. 
This amount is EUR2,210 greater than Ms. Kozlowska’s after-tax, purchas -
ing power–adjusted wealth when the basis was EUR80,000, illustrating the 
additional tax liability associated with a lower cost basis.
An important insight is that tax liabilities are levied on nominal price apprecia -
tion rather than real price appreciation. As a result, inflation exacerbates the eroding 
impact of taxes on the long-term increase and preservation of real purchasing power.
The Impact of Different Tax Rates, Sources of Return, and 
Inflation
The prior examples demonstrate the basic mechanics of tax calculations in a simpli -
fied manner, with a single constant return exposed to a single, uniform, unchanging 
tax rate. The only complicating factor introduced was inflation. In reality, portfolio 
returns originate from various sources and are subject to different tax rates, which 
have implications for portfolio management. A more comprehensive return model 
incorporates annual income component RINC taxed yearly at the tax rate, tx, and 
capital appreciation RCAPITAL  taxed upon liquidation at the capital gains rate, tCG; 
taken together, we arrive at Equation 7 :
 FVIFINC,CAPITAL,TX,TCG  
 = [1 + RINC × (1 – tx)]T + (1 + RCAPTIAL )T(1 – tCG) + tCG. (7)
The first bracketed term restates Equation 2 , and the second bracketed term restates 
Equation 3 . Modifying Equation 7  for inflation yields Equation 8 :
  FVI  F  INC,  CAPITAL,TX, TCG, INFL     
 =   [   1 +  R  INC   ×  (1 −  t  X  )   ______________  1 + infl     T
 ]  +     (1 +  R  CAPITAL  )    T  (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG     ______________________     (1 + infl)    T     (8)
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 266
CASE STUDY
Nataliia Kozlowska: Comparing After-Tax Returns 
on Different Return Sources and Tax Rates
Continuing with the facts in this series of case studies, Ms Kozlowska’s 
EUR100,000 investment in the stock expects to generate 5% in nominal annual 
price appreciation and 2% in nominal annual dividend income. The dividend 
income is taxed at 20% annually, while the price appreciation is also taxed at 
20% when realized in 20 years’ time. The time horizon is 20 years, and the 
annual inflation is 3%.
Questions:
1. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth in after-tax terms after 20 years?
Answer:
  F  V  INC, CAPITAL,TX, TCG   
 = EUR 100, 000  ×  [  (1 +  R  INC   ×  (1 −  t  X  ) )    T  +   (1 +  R  CAPITAL  )    T  (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG  ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (1 + 0.02 ×  (1 − 0.20 ) )    20  +   (1 + 0.05 )    20  (1 − 0.20 )  + 0.20 ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (1 + 0.02 × 0.8 )    20  +  1.05   20  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [1.3736  + 2.6533  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [1.3736  + 2.1226  + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000 × 3.6963  = EUR369, 630 
Ms. Kozlowska’s investment will grow to EUR369,630. Absent taxes, her 
wealth would have grown to
  EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (1 + 0.02 )    20  +   (1 + 0.05 )    20 ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  ( 1.02   20  +  1.05   20 )  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  (1.4859  + 2.6533 )  
  = EUR 100, 000 × 4.1392   = EUR413, 920. 
The potential investment returns consumed by taxes is 
    EUR413, 920–EUR369, 630  ____________________   EUR313, 920   = 14.1% .
2. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth in real, purchasing power, and 
after-tax terms after 20 years?
Answer:
  F  V  INC, CAPITAL,TX, TCG, INFL   
 = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (  1 +  R  INC   ×  (1 −  t  X  )   ______________  1 + infl  )    T
  +     (1 +  R  CAPITAL  )    T    (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG     _______________________     (1 + infl)    T   ]  
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 267
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (  1 + 0.02 ×  (1 − 0.20 )   _______________   1 + 0.03  )    20
  +     (1 + 0.05 )    20  (1− 0.20 )  + 0.20  ____________________     (1 + 0.03 )    20   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (  1 + 0.02 × 0.80  ___________  1.03  )    20
  +    1.05   20  × 0.80 + 0.20  _______________   1.03   20   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (  1.016 _ 1.03  )    20
  +    1.05   20  × 0.80 + 0.20  _______________   1.03   20   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [ 0.9864    20  +   2.6533  × 0.80 + 0.20  _______________  1.8061  ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [0.7606  +   2.3226 _ 1.8061  ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [0.7606  + 1.2860 ]  = EUR204, 655 
Factoring in the impact of both taxes and inflation, the purchasing power 
of Ms. Kozlowska increased by EUR104,655. In nominal terms, her invest -
ment grew to EUR369,630, but taxes and the effects of inflation eroded her 
purchasing power.
3. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth in after-tax terms after 20 years 
if the nominal annual capital appreciation is 2% and the nominal annual 
dividend income is 5%?
Answer:
  F  V  INC, CAPITAL,TX, TCG     
 = EUR 100, 000  ×  [  (1 +  R  INC   ×  (1 −  t  X  ) )    T  +   (1 +  R  CAPITAL  )    T  (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG  ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (1 + 0.05 ×  (1 − 0.20 ) )    20  +   (1 + 0.02 )    20  (1 − 0.20 )  + 0.20 ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (1 + 0.05 × 0.8 )    20  +  1.02   20  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [ 1.04   20  +  1.02   20  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [ 1.04   20  +  1.02   20  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [2.1911  + 1.4859  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [2.1911  + 1.3887 ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 × 3.5798  = EUR357, 980 
Ms. Kozlowska’s investment will grow to EUR357,980. Absent taxes, her 
wealth would have grown to
  EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (1 + 0.05 )    20  +   (1 + 0.02 )    20 ]  
 = EUR 100, 000 ×  ( 1.05   20  +  1.02   20 )  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  (2.6533  + 1.4859 )  = EUR 100, 000 ×  (2.6533  + 1.4859 )  
  = EUR 100, 000 × 4.1392  = EUR413, 920. 
The potential investment returns consumed by taxes are
    EUR413, 920–EUR357, 980  ____________________   EUR313, 920   = 17.8% .
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 268
4. What is Ms. Kozlowska’s expected wealth in real, purchasing power, and 
after-tax terms after 20 years if the nominal annual capital appreciation is 
2% and the nominal annual dividend income is 5%?
Answer:
  F  V  INC, CAPITAL,TX, TCG, INFL   
 = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (  1 +  R  INC   ×  (1 −  t  X  )   ______________  1 + infl  )    T
  +     (1 +  R  CAPITAL  )    T  (1 −  t  CG  )  +  t  CG     ______________________     (1 + infl)    T   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (  1 + 0.05 ×  (1 − 0.20 )   _______________   1 + 0.03  )    20
  +     (1 + 0.02 )    20   (1 − 0.20 )  + 0.20   _____________________     (1 + 0.03 )    20   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [  (  1 + 0.05 × 0.80  ___________  1.03  )    20
  +    1.02   20  × 0.80 + 0.20  _______________   1.03   20   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [   1.04 _ 1.03     20
  +    1.02   20  × 0.80 + 0.20  _______________   1.03   20   ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [ 1.0097    20  +   1.4859  × 0.80 + 0.20  _______________  1.8061  ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [1.2130  +   1.187  + 0.20 _  1.8061  ]  
  = EUR 100, 000 ×  [1.2130  + 0.7689 ]  = EUR198, 190 
Factoring in the impact of both taxes and inflation, the purchasing power 
of Ms. Kozlowska increased by EUR98,190. In nominal terms, her invest -
ment grew by EUR257,980, but taxes and the effects of inflation eroded her 
purchasing power.
Comparing Nominal and After-Tax Nominal with Real and 
After-Tax Real Returns
Examining long-term returns as represented by the S&P 500 Total Return, S&P 500 
Price Return, and US inflation rates, we can illustrate the combined impact of taxes 
and inflation. The difference between S&P 500 Total Return and S&P 500 Price Return 
indicates the dividend yield, while the S&P 500 Price Return only reflects the capital 
appreciation. Both the dividend yield and the capital appreciation are taxed, but they 
are taxed at different rates. By applying different tax rates to these components and 
timing the realization of the capital appreciation that triggers capital gains taxation, 
we can demonstrate the impact of taxes on capital accumulation. Exhibit 26  below 
presents the wealth accumulation in nominal returns for four different investment 
alternatives:
 ■A tax-exempt investment alternative in which neither income nor capital 
accumulation is taxed
 ■A tax-advantaged investment alternative with a 25% tax rate on income but 
no tax on capital appreciation
 ■A taxable investment alternative in which both income and capital apprecia -
tion are taxed at 25%
 ■A high-tax taxable investment alternative with a 50% tax rate on both 
income and capital appreciation
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 269
To compute these returns, taxes were applied at the end of each month. While this 
example streamlines the calculations, it underscores that tax-advantaged investment 
options significantly reduce the impact of taxes on wealth accumulation over time. 
The process of accumulating USD1 million for each of the four investment alternatives 
is summarized below:
Exhibit 26: Accumulation of USD1 Million in Nominal Terms from 1988–2022
21.43 
16.50 
10.94 
5.17 
051015202530
1988 1993 1998 2003 2008 2013 2018USD IN MILLIONSNominal returns
Tax-exempt alternative Tax-advantaged alternative (dividends taxed @25%)
Taxable alternative (both dividends
and appreciation taxed @25%)High tax taxable alternative (both dividends
and appreciation taxed @50%)
Considering the impact of the monthly consumer inflation rate, which is an important 
consideration for private wealth clients aiming to build wealth and enhance their pur -
chasing power, the wealth accumulation results in Exhibit 27  are observed (illustrated 
on the same scale):
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 270
Exhibit 27: Accumulation of USD1 Million in Real Terms from 1988–2022
8.30
6.42
4.16
1.98
051015202530
1988 1993 1998 2003 2008 2013 2018USD IN MILLIONSReal returns
Tax-exempt alternative Tax-advantaged alternative (dividends taxed @25% )
Taxable alternative (both dividends
and appreciation taxed @25%)High tax taxable alternative (both dividends
and appreciation taxed @50%)
The growth in purchasing power is notably lower than in nominal terms. Exhibit 28  
presents the real and nominal accumulation of an initial USD1 million invested in each 
of the four investment alternatives, highlighting the effects of both taxes and inflation:
Exhibit 28: The Accumulation of USD1 Million Invested
Accumulation in millions of USD
Nominal terms Real terms
Tax-exempt alternative 21.43 8.30
Tax-advantaged alternative (dividends taxed 
at 25%)17.78 6.88
Taxable alternative (both dividends and 
appreciation taxed at 25%)10.74 4.16
High-tax taxable alternative (both dividends 
and appreciation taxed at 50%)5.12 1.98
A substantial portion of wealth accumulation can be lost to inflation, especially in 
long-term investments. Inflation can be particularly detrimental to fixed-income 
investments, as it devalues the returns on these investments in real terms. At the same 
time, tax-advantaged investment vehicles can help mitigate the impact of taxes on 
investment returns. By offering tax deferrals, reduced tax rates, or even tax exemp -
tions, these investment alternatives enable investors to retain a larger portion of their 
returns, which can then be reinvested to compound and grow over time.
The Impact of Taxation and Inflation 271
QUESTION SET 4
1. An investor plans to invest GBP25,000 in an investment opportu -
nity expected to generate 6% in taxable income per year over the next 10 
years. The appropriate tax rate is 40%, and taxes on the returns are paid 
annually. Demonstrate that the tax drag of this investment is greater than 
the tax rate.
Solution:
Using
  FV = GBP25, 000 ×   [1 + 0.06 ×  (1 − 0.40 ) ]    10  
  = GBP25, 000 ×   (1 + 0.036 )    10  = GBP25, 000 × 1.4243  = GBP35, 607 
Comparing the result with the no-tax alternative, the investment would 
have grown to
  FV = GBP25, 000 ×   (1 + 0.06 )    10  = GBP25, 000 ×  1.06   10  
  = GBP25, 000 × 1.7908  = GBP44, 771 
The additional growth due to the absence of taxes, GBP44,771 – GBP35,607, 
is GBP9,164. The tax drag is 
    GBP 9, 164  ___________________   GBP44, 771 − GBP25, 000   = 46%  , 
which is greater than the 40% tax rate. The negative impact of taxes on the 
investment’s net returns reduced the overall performance and growth of an 
investment by 46%.
2. An investor plans to invest GBP50,000 in an investment opportunity expect -
ed to generate a return of 8% per year, which is taxed as a deferred capital 
gain only after 10 years. The tax rate is 20%. Compare the impact of taxes on 
the after-tax return relative to if taxes were paid annually at a 20% rate.
Solution:
The investment using deferred taxation grows to
  FV = GBP50, 000 [  (1 + 0.08 )    10  −  [  (1 + 0.08 )    10  − 1]  × 0.20 ]  
  = GBP50, 000 [  (1 + 0.08 )    10  (1 − 0.20 )  + 0.20]  
  = GBP50, 000 [  (1 + 0.08 )    10  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = GBP50, 000 [  (1.08 )    10  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = GBP50, 000 [2.1589  × 0.80 + 0.20]  
  = GBP50, 000 [1.7271  + 0.20]  = GBP96, 355. 
The investment using annual taxation grows to
  FV = GBP50, 000 ×   [1 + 0.08 ×  (1 − 0.20 ) ]    10  
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 272
  = GBP50, 000 ×  1.064    10  = GBP 92, 979. 
The deferred taxation provides a higher accumulation of GBP3,376.
3. Discuss how the benefits of tax deferral can be overcome by finding mis -
priced investment opportunities.
Solution:
The benefits of tax deferral can be overwhelmed if investments taxed on an 
accrual basis offer sufficiently high risk-adjusted returns. That is, purchasing 
securities sufficiently below their intrinsic value (or short selling securities 
sufficiently above intrinsic value) can overcome tax drag even if the invest -
ment is taxed heavily on an annual basis.
INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS AND INVESTMENT POLICY 
STATEMENTS
discuss the differences between private and institutional clients and 
formulate an appropriate Investment Policy Statement for private 
clients
An investment policy statement (IPS)  outlines the client’s unique investment objec -
tives, risk tolerance, investment time horizon, and other applicable constraints and 
guides the wealth manager when constructing and implementing the client’s portfolio 
and asset allocation. The IPS evolves through the conversation between the client and 
the wealth manager.
The IPS should be reviewed routinely as the client’s circumstances or market con -
ditions change. An IPS benefits both the client and the manager because it promotes 
discipline and commitment to the strategy, particularly during adverse or volatile 
market conditions, while describing the investment process and the advisor’s fiduciary 
responsibility to the client. Additionally, an IPS focuses on achieving short-, medium-, 
and long-term financial goals rather than just short-term performance. By offering a 
clear, mutual understanding of the manager’s mandate, an IPS helps ensure, but does 
not guarantee, that the client’s financial objectives are met.
The IPS contains information about the client’s investment objectives, asset base, 
and the overall asset allocation. Together with the wealth manager’s capital market 
assumptions, these define the inputs needed for a capital sufficiency analysis. Capital 
sufficiency analysis  is the process of evaluating whether a client has sufficient capital 
resources to achieve their financial goals and objectives, and it considers the client’s 
assets, liabilities, income, expenses, risk tolerance, time horizon, and other relevant 
factors to determine if their current and future capital resources can adequately sup -
port their lifestyle, financial goals, and long-term financial stability. Whenever the 
capital sufficiency analysis does not support the investment objective, the manager 
must work with the client to revise objectives and create those that the manager 
judges to be achievable.6
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements 273
An IPS may further specify whether the assets are managed using strategic asset 
allocation, tactical asset allocation, or a combination of both.
 ■Strategic asset allocation  is a long-term strategy that establishes tar -
get allocations for various asset classes and aims to optimize the balance 
between risk and reward by diversifying investments, considering an 
investor’s financial objectives, risk tolerance, and investment timeline. The 
target allocation relies on historical data, projected returns, and correlations 
between asset classes.
 ■Tactical asset allocation  is a more proactive strategy that adjusts asset 
class allocations within a portfolio based on short-term market trends, 
economic conditions, or valuation changes to capitalize on temporary 
market inefficiencies or opportunities to improve returns or manage risk 
more effectively. Unlike strategic asset allocation’s long-term focus, tactical 
asset allocation allows for more frequent portfolio adjustments in response 
to market conditions and expectations. Consequently, this method entails 
higher trading costs and increased complexity and requires consistent mon -
itoring of market conditions and asset performance. Additionally, tactical 
asset allocation demands a higher level of skill and experience.
The case study below provides a practical example of how these asset allocation 
strategies affect a portfolio’s management.
CASE STUDY
C.Y. Lee: Combining Strategic and Tactical Asset 
Allocation
Mr. C.Y. Lee, the managing director for the investment firm Acme & Bass 
located in the Asia-Pacific region, is working with his wealth manager to com -
bine strategic and tactical asset allocation in his IPS.
In establishing the portfolio asset allocation, the wealth manager considers 
Mr. Lee’s assets, expected cash needs, risk tolerance, and financial goals. To 
achieve higher long-term risk-adjusted returns, the manager combines both 
strategic and tactical asset allocation approaches while incorporating rebal -
ancing limits for the strategic allocation. A potential strategic asset allocation 
plan with target allocations and rebalancing limits for various asset classes 
can be as follows:
 
 
 Lower  
rebalancing limitStrategic 
allocationUpper rebalanc -
ing limit
Cash 3% 5% 7%
Cash and equivalents 5%
Fixed income 25% 30% 35%
Short-term debt investments 20%
Intermediate-term bonds 10%
Equities 45% 50% 55%
Domestic, Singapore 10%
International, Asia Pacific 
only10%
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 274
 Lower  
rebalancing limitStrategic 
allocationUpper rebalanc -
ing limit
International, ex-Asia Pacific 30%
Alternatives 8% 10% 12%
Private equity 3% 5% 7%
 
The rebalancing limits ensure that the portfolio remains aligned with Mr. 
Lee’s long-term financial goals, risk tolerance, and investment horizon. If any 
asset class allocation drifts beyond the specified limits, the portfolio manager 
will rebalance the portfolio, typically to bring it back in line with the target 
strategic allocations. As we shall see shortly, there are several methods for 
triggering portfolio rebalancing: one method is based on time, so the portfolio 
is rebalanced at set time intervals (i.e., quarterly or semi-annually, etc.), and the 
other method is based on thresholds, so the portfolio is rebalanced whenever 
specified limits are breached.
Additionally, the IPS allows for tactical asset allocation adjustments spe -
cifically in international equities to capitalize on short-term market trends or 
opportunities. For example, the wealth manager might have the discretion to 
temporarily increase the allocation to international equities by up to 10%, or a 
total of 50% of the portfolio, if they identify an attractive investment opportu -
nity in a specific market or sector and by selling some of the domestic equity 
holdings. This tactical adjustment would be subject to the following conditions, 
such as the overall equities allocation should remain within the rebalancing 
limit (i.e., should not exceed 55% or fall below 45%).
The manager must provide a rationale for a tactical adjustment, including 
the anticipated duration and expected impact on the portfolio’s risk and return 
profile.
The tactical allocation must be reviewed periodically, at least quarterly, to 
assess its ongoing appropriateness and potential need for further adjustment.
This hybrid approach allows Mr. Lee to benefit from the stability and diver -
sification provided by strategic asset allocation while also leveraging tactical 
adjustments in international equities to enhance returns or manage risk more 
effectively.
Parts of an IPS
The IPS lays the foundation for the client–wealth manager relationship and details 
how the wealth manager will make investment decisions. As such, it guides the man -
agement of an investment portfolio by outlining the investment goals, risk tolerance, 
and constraints for an individual or an organization. It provides a framework for 
making investment decisions and helps ensure that the investment strategy aligns 
with the investor’s objectives.
The IPS includes the client’s background and investment objectives, the key param -
eters of the investment program, the portfolio asset allocation, and some discussion 
of the duties and responsibilities of relevant parties. It is developed by the wealth 
manager, reflects conversations and discussions with the client, and serves as a guid -
ance document. An IPS is a dynamic document that should be reviewed regularly to 
capture changing conditions, preferences, goals, objectives, and time horizons. Exhibit 
29 depicts the typical components of an IPS.
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements 275
Exhibit 29: Components of an IPS
Investment Policy
Statement
BackgroundInvestment
objectivesInvestment
parametersPortfolio
managementDuties and
responsibilitiesAppendix
Risk toleranceType of
authorityWealth
manager
responsibilities
IPS reviewModeled
portfolio
behavior
Capital
market
expectationsRebalancing
ImplementationTactical
changesInvestment
time horizon
Asset class
preferences
Other
investment
preference
Liquidity
preference
Constraints
Portfolio asset
allocation
Background
The background section of the IPS usually contains the client’s name, age, personal 
details, and pertinent financial information. This should include the portfolio’s personal 
and business assets’ market value and individual accounts within the portfolio, as well 
as the tax status of these accounts, and delineate substantial financial or nonfinancial 
assets not managed by the wealth manager. Such assets might encompass privately 
held business interests, real estate portfolios, and other valuable privately held assets. 
This section should also include a description of the family, its members, its sources 
of wealth (e.g., family business), and if appropriate, its core values. Specifics about 
tax jurisdictions where income and capital gains are taxed should be included here.
Investment objectives
The investment objectives section of the IPS typically outlines various short-term 
and long-term goals. Clients often have multiple, conflicting objectives they want to 
achieve with the same portfolio, which emerge during discussions between the client 
and the manager about financial matters.
Investment objectives should include overall portfolio return and risk objectives. 
Specific investment objectives should be detailed and quantifiable whenever possible. 
For example, a client might have specific amounts in mind for future bequests such as 
funds for their children or charitable donations. Investment objectives should avoid 
being oversimplified and vague. When dealing with multiple competing objectives, 
the manager should identify the primary goal, especially when the client has difficulty 
assigning specific amounts to future objectives. For instance, if a client wants to 
support their retirement lifestyle while preserving an inheritance for their children, 
the main objective would be retirement security, with the inheritance as a secondary 
consideration.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 276
Investment objectives should also account for cash flows that affect capital suf -
ficiency analysis. If a client plans to make regular contributions to the investment 
portfolio before starting withdrawals, the objective should reflect these future con -
tributions. Similarly, if a client expects a significant future liquidity inflow, such as 
proceeds from a settlement, business sale, or inheritance, this information should 
be included. Likewise, if a client anticipates a considerable liquidity outflow, such as 
meeting spousal maintenance, it should also be listed as an objective.
Investment parameters
The investment parameters section of the IPS outlines preferences that influence each 
individual client’s investment program and reflect the specific client’s individual needs. 
Investment parameters include:
 ■Risk tolerance : This section outlines the client’s ability and willingness to 
withstand portfolio volatility, as described earlier, and can reflect the score 
on a risk tolerance questionnaire as well as discussions that include risk 
preference, risk tolerance, and overall risk–return trade-offs.
 ■Investment time horizon : This section lists the time horizon for the 
agreed-upon goals and objectives across a range of years. It reflects discus -
sions with the client. Typically, for a client with a long horizon, the IPS may 
state it as “exceeds 15 years”; for a shorter horizon, the IPS may state it as 
“less than 10 years. ” When there are multiple or parallel goals, each spe -
cific goal may be listed with its own time horizon, some of which, such as 
bequests and philanthropic activities, may exceed the client’s lifetime.
 ■Asset class preference : This section lists the main asset classes included in 
the client’s portfolio. These asset class preferences are often described in the 
context of risk, return, and income characteristics.
 ■Liquidity preferences : This section addresses liquidity considerations for 
clients who maintain cash in their portfolios and outlines a specific cash 
balance that the wealth manager must maintain. If a preference for cash 
constrains the asset class selection or implementation decisions, this should 
be discussed and then documented in the IPS. For instance, if a client’s cash 
needs dictate that the entire portfolio should be held in relatively liquid 
assets, then there may be a cap on holding less liquid private equity and 
similarly illiquid asset classes.
 ■Other investment preferences : This section contains client-specific infor -
mation such as specific “legacy” holdings that a client wishes to retain, like 
equity in a former employer, or an investment that the client wishes to make 
countering the wealth manager’s advice. Some clients may hold a substantive 
proportion of their portfolio in their current or former employer’s equity. 
This may create portfolio concentration risk, which can adversely impact 
the risk–return characteristics of the portfolio. Environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG)-related constraints should normally appear in this sec -
tion. When a client expresses preferences for investments that meet socially 
responsible investing (SRI), ESG investment standards, or are otherwise 
acceptable or unacceptable due to religious, ethical, or personal preferences 
or beliefs, they should be noted here. Additionally, investment preferences 
may include portfolio turnover policy detailing how and when realization of 
potential gains should be conducted. Moreover, a preference for investing in 
actively or passively managed funds could also be added. Finally, any special 
tax or legal considerations should be noted. These might include issues of 
dual citizenship, legal residence in multiple countries, and the like.
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements 277
 ■Constraints : This section lists investment constraints that may restrict the 
wealth manager from implementing certain investments or strategies. For 
example, a client may be constrained by an investment with large unreal -
ized capital gains, which would create significant tax liabilities if sold. Such 
constraints should be clearly and unambiguously documented in the IPS, 
outlining the specific policy or programs for managing the effects of such 
a concentration. This may include a range of preferences from keeping to 
liquidating the investment over time. The choice of appropriate tax mitiga -
tion strategy should also be included here. For clients expressing preferences 
for SRI, ESG, religious, or ethical investment standards, the constraints 
imposed by these should be noted here. Finally, the process for client 
approval should also be unambiguously documented.
 ■Portfolio asset allocation : This section contains the target allocation or range 
for each asset class in the client’s portfolio. Wealth managers who use a 
strategic asset allocation typically define a target allocation for each asset 
class as well as upper and lower bounds. Wealth managers who use a tacti -
cal asset allocation approach may list asset class target “ranges” rather than 
specific target allocation percentages.
Portfolio management
The portfolio management section of the IPS typically incorporates portfolio man -
agement topics such as the extent of any discretionary authority, the frequency and 
method of rebalancing, and, if relevant, changes to tactical asset allocation. The wealth 
manager may be granted discretionary authority to manage assets without explicit 
client approval. There are, however, different levels of such authority:
 ■A wealth manager with full discretion  is free to implement rebalancing 
trades and replace fund managers without prior client approval.
 ■A wealth manager with less than full discretion has received authority to 
make certain specific changes such as rebalancing.
 ■A wealth manager in a nondiscretionary capacity  makes recommendations 
to the client but is not able to take action without a client’s consent.
Wealth managers may follow different methods of rebalancing a portfolio to realign 
the portfolio to the target allocation. Rebalancing may be included in the asset allo -
cation section of an IPS. Expectations regarding the frequency of portfolio revisions 
may be stated a number of ways:
In a time-based rebalancing policy , the wealth manager rebalances client port -
folios regularly, at a certain given time interval such as quarterly, semi-annually, or 
annually, regardless of any difference between prevailing asset class weights and target 
asset class weights.
Time-based rebalancing is a straightforward, simple, easy to understand and easy 
to implement policy. Its predictable rebalancing schedule ensures regular portfolio 
reassessment, keeping the strategic asset allocation on track, thereby reducing the risk 
of portfolio drift from their target allocations due to market fluctuations. Effectively, 
the systematic nature of rebalancing serves as an inherent risk management mech -
anism. However, the time-based rebalancing strategy is somewhat unresponsive to 
significant and sudden market changes, which may expose the portfolio to higher 
risks or cause missed investment opportunities between scheduled rebalancing 
times. Furthermore, it may lead to unnecessary transactions, which is particularly 
burdensome when the difference between prevailing asset class weights and target 
asset class weights is small (i.e., when the portfolio has not deviated much from its 
target allocations). Additionally, rebalancing transactions may incur extra costs both 
in terms of transaction fees and potential tax liabilities. Finally, the deterministic 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 278
nature of time-based rebalancing means that buying or selling assets is dictated by the 
calendar rather than the prevailing market conditions. This could sometimes result 
in transacting at less than favorable prices.
In a threshold-based rebalancing policy , the wealth manager rebalances the 
portfolio when asset class weights deviate from their target weights by a prespecified 
percentage, for example, upper and lower rebalancing limits, regardless of timing 
and frequency.
Threshold-based rebalancing reacts to changing market conditions: the portfolio 
is rebalanced whenever there is a significant deviation from its target allocation, that 
is, whenever upper or lower rebalancing limits are breached. This strategy is sensi -
tive to market volatility and sudden shifts. This approach could potentially be more 
efficient than the time-based rebalancing because it involves rebalancing only when 
necessary. This minimizes transaction costs and tax liabilities. Furthermore, because 
it allows for swift adjustments in response to volatile markets, it may offer better risk 
management, but at potentially higher cost.
However, threshold-based rebalancing is inherently complex, often requiring 
more sophisticated monitoring and automation systems to keep track of portfolio 
drift and execute rebalancing when needed. Also, the timing of rebalancing can be 
inconsistent. During stable markets, there may not be an adjustment for long periods. 
However, during periods of volatility, there may be frequent rebalancing in response 
to sudden periods of persistent volatility, which can create a more short-term focus. 
Because the rebalancing trigger is tied closely to market fluctuations, there is a risk of 
overreacting to short-term market events, potentially skewing away from long-term 
investment goals.
Both time-based rebalancing and threshold-based rebalancing require defining 
the target rebalancing weight, which is typically the strategic asset allocation. Exhibit 
30 presents a comparison of time-based and threshold-based portfolio rebalancing.
Exhibit 30: Comparison of Time-Based and Threshold-Based Portfolio 
Rebalancing
Upper Rebalancing Limit (%)
Lower Rebalancing Limit (%)
T3T2T1T0Rebalanced
to SARebalanced
to SARebalanced
to SAAsset Class Weight in 
Portfolio (%)Strategic
Allocation (%)
Threshold-Based Rebalancing Time-Based Rebalancing
In a hypothetical portfolio, the asset class weights are initially set (at T0) to those 
of the strategic allocation. At the end of period 1 (T1), which could be a quarter, for 
example, portfolio rebalancing occurs both on a time and threshold basis to bring 
the asset class back to its strategic allocation. At the end of T2, rebalancing would be 
performed on a time basis but not on a threshold basis because no threshold limit has 
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements 279
been reached. During T3, threshold-based rebalancing would be implemented when 
the upper rebalancing limit was breached. However, time-based rebalancing would 
only be performed at the end of period 3.
The section on tactical changes lists the specific parameters wealth managers must 
consider when making periodic adjustments, tactical changes, or other adjustments 
to a client’s asset allocation. If target allocation ranges have been established in the 
earlier portfolio asset allocation section, this section of the IPS indicates whether, 
when, and how the manager can break those ranges when executing a tactical change.
This section includes information about the timeline over which the new portfolio 
will be created and the asset classes, investment alternatives, investment products, 
and derivatives the wealth manager anticipates using. Typically, it includes any spe -
cific third-party funds or money managers recommended by the wealth manager, 
the proprietary investment offerings managed by the wealth manager’s firm, or some 
combination of these approaches. This section indicates whether the wealth manager 
prefers to invest in mutual funds, ETFs, private equity, hedge funds, or individual secu -
rities. When using third-party money managers, some additional relevant information 
includes the incremental costs, the specific selection and retention criteria the wealth 
manager uses to vet and pick third-party managers, and the extent, frequency, and 
steps included in the wealth manager’s due diligence process to vet external managers.
Duties and responsibilities
The duties and responsibilities section of the IPS typically discusses the wealth manag -
er’s overall responsibilities, including expectations about the ongoing review of an IPS.
The wealth management responsibilities section helps the client in understanding 
how the wealth manager assists the client to reach their investment objectives and 
may include the following information:
 ■Developing an appropriate asset allocation
 ■Recommending or selecting investment options such as pooled investment 
vehicles or individual securities
 ■Monitoring the asset allocation and rebalancing
 ■Using derivatives, leverage, short sales, and repurchase agreements (repos) 
in an appropriate manner that is consistent with the client’s investment and 
risk objectives
 ■Monitoring strategy implementation costs
 ■Monitoring the activities of third-party service providers (e.g., asset manag -
ers and/or custodians)
 ■Drafting and maintaining the IPS
 ■Reporting of performance, including an indication of the base currency
 ■Reporting of taxes and financial statements
 ■Voting proxies
 ■Assisting with the preparation of agreements associated with private fund 
offerings
 ■When the manager uses third-party providers, the IPS might also list their 
responsibilities. The distinct and important role of an asset custodian that 
maintains segregated client accounts, values the investment assets, collects 
income, and settles transactions is typically included.
The IPS review  section sets expectations for how frequently the client and wealth 
manager will review the IPS and affirm that the investment objectives remain accurate 
and that the prevailing strategy is likely to meet those objectives.
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 280
IPS appendix
The appendix to the IPS often includes details that typically change more frequently 
than the main portion of the IPS, such as:
 ■Modeled portfolio behavior : This section describes a range of possible 
performance outcomes over various holding periods and can provide more 
value to the client than merely stating the return objective or the “expected 
compound return. ” The wealth manager may provide a modeled distribution 
of returns at various percentile ranges, which enables the wealth manager to 
quantify portfolio downside risk, particularly over short time periods. This 
can help to confirm what level of downside risk the client is able to accept.
 ■Capital market expectations : This section contains the modeled, simulated, 
or calculated portfolio statistics, including expected returns, standard devia -
tions, and correlations. The section may also include historical returns both 
on a portfolio and individual asset class basis.
The case study below provides an example of how investment objectives are for -
mulated for an HNWI.
CASE STUDY
Huang Zhuo Wei: Background and Investment 
Objectives
Huang Zhuo Wei, age 51, is a private investor in Singapore. Wei is an engineer 
by trade but has also been a successful real estate developer. His portfolio con -
sists of SGD50 million in a liquid securities portfolio, including common stock 
positions in which he has large, embedded capital gains, and several real estate 
investments valued at approximately SGD90 million (combined). He expects 
to make additional real estate investments in the coming years. He estimates 
that he can invest approximately SGD1,000,000 per year, inflation-adjusted, in 
real estate until retirement.
He has a much higher than average risk tolerance and, historically, his liquid 
portfolio has consisted mostly of large-cap technology companies. He has stated 
that his time horizon is 10 years because he anticipates retiring in approximately 
10 years. He estimates that he will need approximately SGD3 million per year, 
inflation-adjusted, to support his lifestyle in retirement. He wishes to grow 
his investment resources and create a significant inheritance for his children.
Questions:
1. Discuss how Wei’s wealth manager should create the investment objectives 
section of Wei’s IPS.
Solution:
The purpose of this portfolio is to support Wei’s lifestyle in retirement and 
to provide an inheritance for his children. Aside from the investment assets 
in his portfolio, Wei has private real estate investments valued at approxi -
mately SGD90 million and is likely to add to this segment of his net worth 
over the next several years. Wei does not anticipate needing distributions 
from this portfolio for at least 10 years.
Wei estimates an annual, inflation-adjusted lifestyle need of approximately 
SGD3 million per year beginning at his retirement in 10 years. His cash 
needs will be satisfied in part through portfolio distributions and in part 
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements 281
from his real estate portfolio. The wealth manager will continue to work 
with Wei to quantify his bequest objective and ensure that his portfolio 
distribution rate is sustainable throughout his retirement.
2. Discuss how his wealth manager should reflect Wei’s investment horizon in 
the IPS.
Solution:
Given his desire to create a significant inheritance for his children, Wei’s 
true investment horizon is through retirement, a period that likely will be 
much longer than 10 years. His wealth manager should describe his time 
horizon as exceeding 10 years. The life expectancy in Singapore for a male 
is around 81 years; hence, the time in retirement can be approximately 20 
years.
Sample Investment Policy Statement
The following case study demonstrates a sample IPS for a private client couple, David 
and Amelia King. The Kings’ wealth manager does not use a tactical asset allocation 
approach for the couple, so the section on tactical changes is not relevant in this case.
CASE STUDY
David and Amelia King: Sample Investment Policy 
Statement
Background and Investment Objectives
This IPS is designed to assist David and Amelia in meeting their financial objec -
tives. It contains a summation of their objectives and expectations, sets forth 
an investment structure for attaining these objectives, and outlines ongoing 
responsibilities.
The purpose of this portfolio is to support the continuation of David and 
Amelia’s current lifestyle, provide for their family’s needs, and fund their phil -
anthropic objectives. Maintenance of their current lifestyle is their primary 
objective, followed by support for family members and charitable aspirations, 
in that order. To meet these objectives, they anticipate needing approximately 
USD350,000 per year in inflation-adjusted portfolio distributions. Furthermore, 
they intend to purchase a second residence within the next two years. They 
expect the purchase price for the second residence to be approximately USD1.5 
million. David and Amelia have not articulated a specific dollar amount that 
they intend to leave to their children, nor a specific dollar amount that they 
wish to leave to charity at their death. These amounts must be quantified as 
soon as possible.
In establishing their asset allocation, David and Amelia have considered their 
total assets and expected cash needs. They are seeking to achieve a higher long-
term rate of return and are willing to assume the associated portfolio volatility.
Portfolio accounts
1. Taxable joint account for David and Amelia
2. Tax-deferred account for David
3. Tax-deferred account for Amelia
 Current combined  market value  = USD12,250,000
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 282
Investment Parameters
Risk tolerance
David and Amelia are able and willing to withstand short- and intermediate-term 
portfolio volatility. They recognize and acknowledge the anticipated level of 
portfolio volatility associated with their asset allocation (as illustrated in the 
Modeled Portfolio Behavior section of the Appendix).
Investment time horizon
David and Amelia have an investment time horizon that exceeds 15 years.
Asset class preferences
The following asset classes are selected:
 ■Short-term debt investments
 ■Intermediate-term bonds
 ■US stocks
 ■Non-US stocks
 ■Global real estate securities
Liquidity preferences
David and Amelia wish to maintain within their portfolio a minimum cash 
balance of USD50,000. They typically maintain a more sizable cash balance at 
their primary bank.
Other investment preferences
The Kings wish to maintain their positions in Acme Manufacturing, Inc., which 
Amelia received through inheritance, and Artful Publishing, Ltd., which is her 
former employer. Neither position represents significant concentration risk in 
the context of their broader portfolio.
David has an interest in a private real estate limited partnership that invests 
primarily in office buildings throughout Asia. This exposure has been taken 
into consideration in designing the asset allocation.
Constraints
Amelia’s position in Artful Publishing, Ltd., has significant embedded capital 
gains.
Portfolio Asset Allocation
 
Lower rebal -
ancing limitStrategic 
allocationUpper rebal -
ancing limit
Short-term debt investments 8% 10% 12%
Intermediate-term bonds 16% 20% 24%
US stocks 30% 35% 40%
Non-US stocks 20% 25% 30%
Global real estate securities 8% 10% 12%
 
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements 283
Short-Term
Debt
Investments
10%Global
Real Estate
Securities
10%
Intermediate-
Term Bonds
20%
US Stocks
35%Non-US Stocks
25%
Portfolio Management
Discretionary authority
The wealth manager has full discretion to implement portfolio changes related 
to rebalancing the portfolio, investing new funds in existing positions, and 
generating liquidity to meet withdrawal requests from existing positions.
The wealth manager will receive approval prior to establishing new positions 
or eliminating existing positions.
Rebalancing
The wealth manager will review the portfolio on at least a monthly basis. 
Rebalancing will be determined by the lower and upper asset class limits set 
forth in the Portfolio Asset Allocation section of the IPS.
Implementation
The wealth manager will use third-party money managers via mutual funds, 
ETFs, and separate accounts of individual securities to implement the invest -
ment strategy. The wealth manager conducts a quarterly due diligence process 
to evaluate recommended managers as well as the universe of other available 
managers. This process involves quantitative risk and return comparisons to 
appropriate indexes and peer groups, as well as qualitative assessments of other 
factors that may impact a manager’s ability to perform in the future. More 
information about this process is available at the client’s request.
Duties and Responsibilities
Wealth manager responsibilities
The wealth manager is responsible for the following:
 ■Developing an appropriate asset allocation
 ■Selecting investment options
 ■Implementing the agreed-upon strategy
 ■Monitoring the asset allocation and rebalancing when necessary
 ■Monitoring the costs associated with implementing the investment 
strategy
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 284
 ■Monitoring the activities of other service vendors (e.g., custodians)
 ■Drafting and maintaining the IPS
 ■Performance reporting
 ■Tax and financial accounting reporting
 ■Proxy voting
 ■IPS reviews
The client will review this IPS at least annually to determine whether the 
investment objectives are still accurate. The wealth manager will review this IPS 
at least annually to evaluate the continued feasibility of achieving the client’s 
investment objectives.
IPS Appendix
Modeled portfolio behavior
Modeled compound (inflation-adjusted) return: 6.23%
Modeled distribution of returns
 
Y ear10th 
percentile25th 
percentile50th 
percentile75th 
percentile90th 
percentile
1 –10.45 –2.89 6.23 16.21 26.01
3 –3.75 0.86 6.23 11.88 17.24
5 –1.58 2.05 6.23 10.58 14.66
10 0.64 3.25 6.23 9.29 12.12
15 1.65 3.79 6.23 8.72 11.02
25 2.66 4.34 6.23 8.15 9.92
 
Portfolio downside risk, 1-year horizon:
 ■25% likelihood of a return less than –2.89%
 ■10% likelihood of a return less than –10.45%
Portfolio downside risk, 15-year horizon:
 ■25% likelihood of a compound annual return less than 3.79%
 ■10% likelihood of a compound annual return less than 1.65%
Capital market assumptions
Modeled Portfolio Statistics
 
  Expected 
return (%) *Standard 
deviation (%)Modeled 
compound 
return (%) *
Short-term debt investments 2.5 2.0 2.5
Intermediate-term bonds 3.5 8.0 3.2
US stocks 8.5 22.0 6.1
Non-US stocks 10.0 26.0 6.6
Global real estate securities 7.5 23.0 4.9
 
* Inflation-adjusted
Individual Investors and Investment Policy Statements 285
Modeled correlations
 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1Short-term debt 
investments1.00        
2Intermediate-term bonds 0.79 1.00      
3US stocks –0.08 –0.03 1.00    
4Non-US stocks –0.29 –0.27 0.76 1.00  
5Global real estate securities –0.15 0.08 0.42 0.39 1.00
 
QUESTION SET 5
1. Contrast strategic and tactical asset allocation in forming invest -
ment strategy.
Solution:
Strategic asset allocation focuses on target allocations across asset catego -
ries and is a long-term strategy, whereas tactical asset allocation is a proac -
tive strategy to adjust asset allocations reflecting short-term market trends, 
economic conditions, or valuation changes.
2. A client’s limited partnership stake in a venture that invests in office build -
ings throughout Asia has been revalued such that this stake is now worth 
30% less than estimated at the time the IPS was written. Assume that, prior 
to the revaluation, this stake accounted for 10% of the total market value of 
the portfolio and was worth EUR10 million, the target strategic allocation 
for global real estate securities. The lower bound for rebalancing is 8%. The 
next annual review of the IPS is scheduled in nine months. Which response 
below best describes the next IPS review?
A. The next IPS review should take place in nine months as scheduled.
B. The next IPS review should be rescheduled as soon as possible with a 
focus on capital sufficiency analysis.
C. The next IPS review should be rescheduled as soon as possible to 
review the asset allocation of the portfolio.
Solution:
C is the correct response.
Given the assumption on the initial size of the limited partnership stake, the 
decline in the total portfolio value is just 3%, so a capital sufficiency analysis 
is unnecessary. Moreover, the allocation to Global Real Estate Securities de -
clines to 7.2% (from 10%), so it is just below the 8% lower rebalancing limit 
for this asset class — see calculations below. Therefore, the next IPS review 
should be rescheduled as soon as possible to review the asset allocation of 
the portfolio with a view towards rebalancing.
Decline in total portfolio value:
    USD 10, 000, 000  −   (0.10  ×  0.30  ×  USD 10, 000, 000)   −  USD 10, 000, 000       ______________________________________________________     USD 10, 000, 000   
 = − 0.03 or − 3% 
Allocation to global real estate securities:
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 286
    0.10  ×  0.70  ×  USD 10, 000, 000    _______________________________________     USD 10, 000, 000 −   (0.10  ×  0.30  ×  USD 10, 000, 000)    = 0.072  or 7.2% 
A is incorrect because significant changes in market conditions, such as the 
revaluation of the limited partnership stake, can create the need for an IPS 
review earlier than a scheduled once per year review.
B is incorrect because the couple can tolerate portfolio volatility, and the 
decline in total portfolio value is just 3%, so a focus on the capital sufficiency 
analysis should not be a necessary aspect of the next IPS review.
3. A client of a private wealth manager has specifically stated a long-term 
time horizon. This client wants to achieve a goal of EUR4,000,000 to fund 
retirement in 20 years. Additionally, with no dependents of her own, the 
client would like to contribute towards her young niece’s eventual university 
expenses. Which of the following best describes the priority of client goals 
within the investment objectives section of an IPS?
A. Both goals reflect primary objectives.
B. The educational funding goal is a primary objective, while the retire -
ment goal is a secondary objective.
C. The retirement goal is a primary objective, while the educational fund -
ing goal is a secondary objective.
Solution:
C is the correct response. Because the retirement goal is quantified and has 
a time frame that is consistent with the client’s long-term time horizon, it is 
the primary objective. Funding the niece’s education is a secondary objective 
since no amount or timing is specified for it.
A is incorrect because both goals cannot be primary objectives.
B is incorrect because the client’s time horizon is for the long term, so 
individual retirement goals should take precedence over the funding of the 
niece’s education, for which no amount or timing is specified.
Practice Problems 287
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions 
1-6
Henlopen McZhao is a private wealth manager and is meeting with a new client, 
Nescopeck Cree, to plan a wealth management strategy. To begin this meeting, 
McZhao seeks additional background information from Cree necessary as part 
of preparing the IPS. McZhao learns that Cree is 45 years old and is married 
with three children (ages 8, 5, and 1). Cree is currently employed as an attorney 
with annual salary of EUR300,000. Cree has several specific financial goals that 
he wishes to achieve in the future but has no particular return objective for his 
portfolio currently valued at EUR2,500,000. Because he has been investing for 20 
years, Cree is comfortable with moderate levels of market volatility. His em -
ployment provides for his current expenses, so Cree’s liquidity requirements are 
minimal. Cree prefers to have his environmental and social concerns reflected in 
his investment choices.
McZhao then focuses on Cree’s financial goals. Cree plans to retire in 17 years 
and expects to need EUR200,000 per year on an inflation-adjusted basis to fund 
a desired retirement lifestyle for himself and his spouse. However, he is also con -
cerned about how increasing medical expenses might affect his portfolio’s ability 
to fund their retirement. As a potential solution to this concern, Cree hopes to 
purchase an apartment building within the next three years and use the rental 
income from this investment property to help fund medical expenses during re -
tirement. Cree wants to fund university expenses for his three children, with the 
first payment starting in 10 years and continuing for 12–15 years. Cree’s wife en -
joys donating to philanthropic causes. She currently donates EUR10,000 per year, 
but by the time Cree retires, she hopes to increase this amount to EUR30,000 per 
year. Cree collects antique furniture and budgets EUR15,000 per year for addi -
tions to his collection. He mentions that this year’s antique purchase will be his 
next large expense and currently has the highest priority of all his goals.
McZhao continues the discussion with Cree in order to evaluate his degree of 
risk tolerance. Cree considers retirement a long-term goal and is willing to en -
dure a 10% drop in expected retirement spending. However, he is very concerned 
with having sufficient funds to cover medical expenses and views purchasing an 
investment property as a source of stable income to cover these expenses, so it is 
very important to him to purchase the building.
1. Which of the following investment parameter categories of the IPS is least likely  
to include Cree’s preference for investments that reflect his environmental and 
social concerns?
A. Asset class preference
B. Other investment preferences
C. Constraints
2. Identify and discuss at least one important missing component of Cree’s financial 
background necessary to preparing the IPS.
3. Which one of the following would most likely be described as an unplanned goal 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 288
for Cree?
A. Medical expenses
B. Apartment building purchase
C. University expenses
4. Identify and discuss two areas in which Cree needs to improve goal 
quantification.
5. Discuss how a capital sufficiency analysis may assist McZhao in helping Cree 
with goal prioritization across his identified goals.
6. Determine Cree’s degree of risk tolerance (lower versus higher) with respect to 
his retirement goal. Justify your response.
The following information relates to questions 
7-9
Sharfepto Zik, a private wealth manager, is meeting with a 60-year-old client, 
Garbanzo Patel, in order to create an IPS for Patel’s upcoming retirement in the 
next year. Patel estimates that he will require EUR200,000 per year, with annual 
increases for inflation, during retirement. Patel’s primary spending goals during 
retirement are to provide for his family’s needs and maintain his retirement 
lifestyle. His secondary goals are to fund his philanthropic activities and leave a 
significant inheritance to his children.
During his retirement, Patel will receive union pension payments of EUR50,000 
per year with annual increases for inflation. In his spare time, Patel runs a small 
business that provides him with an annual income of EUR120,000 and is valued 
at EUR1 million. He will continue running his business during retirement.
Patel holds a portfolio of securities valued at approximately EUR4 million with 
a cost basis of EUR1 million. Patel expects an annual pretax capital gains return 
of 6.5% per year on his securities portfolio. The capital gains tax rate is 20%. The 
portfolio primarily contains dividend-paying stocks and interest-bearing bonds, 
and the yield on the portfolio is 2%. Both stock dividend and bond interest are 
taxed annually at a rate of 40%. In the past, Patel has reinvested all these distribu -
tions back into his portfolio but anticipates that after retirement he may need to 
use some of the distributions to fund his expenses.
Additionally, Patel plans to buy a vacation home to enjoy his early retirement 
years and expects to hold the home for 10 years. His budget for the vacation 
home is approximately EUR1.7 million. He expects an 8% annual pretax appreci -
ation in the value of his vacation home and expects to pay capital gains tax of 20% 
on the sale of this vacation home. Patel is considering selling half of his securities 
portfolio to fund the vacation home purchase.
Patel is also worried about the effects of inflation. While his pension income will 
adjust for inflation, he is concerned that the income from his small business is 
unlikely to adjust with inflation. He asks Zik to do an analysis to assess whether 
his income sources are expected to be sufficient in 10 years to cover the effects of 
inflation of 5% per year.
7. Determine whether the distributions from Patel’s portfolio are expected to be 
sufficient to cover the expected shortfall between his retirement needs and his 
Practice Problems 289
anticipated income.
8. Determine whether Patel should sell half of his securities portfolio to buy the 
vacation home.
9. Evaluate Patel’s ability to generate his retirement needs in 10 years after account -
ing for the effects of inflation on his small business income and his securities 
portfolio value.
The following information relates to questions 
10-14
Val Sili, age 22, has just graduated from university and begins making ambitious 
plans for her future. She has accepted a position as a data science analyst in a 
start-up company starting next month. Her starting annual salary is USD96,000 
per year (after tax), and as part of her compensation, will also receive stock 
options in the company annually worth USD50,000. She expects to be able to set 
aside 25% of her after-tax salary into investments in a taxable account while also 
maximizing her investment contributions to a defined-contribution account.
Sili believes that by the age of 28, she will be earning several times more than her 
starting salary at the age of 22. She further believes that she will have realized 
a payoff from her company stock options of at least USD5 million and plans to 
use her option proceeds to purchase real estate and make selected investments 
in other start-up ventures. She expects the value of her financial assets to be 
approximately USD300,000.
By the age of 35, Sili is expecting to be a top executive at a technology firm, with 
personal investable net worth in excess of USD20 million and a net worth of at 
least USD100 million.
Between the ages of 35 and 40, Sili expects to have gained sufficient experience 
and access to financial capital to start her own technology company, with an 
initial public offering several years later that will generate a payoff of at least 
USD1 billion. After serving as chair and CEO of the company for two years while 
it transitions to being a public company, Sili plans to retire from life as a technol -
ogy company senior executive. She plans to live a relatively minimalist lifestyle 
financially in retirement while using her vast wealth to invest in young technol -
ogy startups and provide advisory services for startup managers. As her abilities 
to provide such services decline, she plans to gradually donate her wealth to fund 
endowments to nonprofit scientific organizations devoted to solving important 
world problems with a specific focus on targeted investments in countries with 
high Gini coefficients.
10. Which of the following investments would be most appropriate for Sili during the 
beginning years of her career?
A. Technology equity funds
B. Lower-risk equity funds and fixed-income funds
C. Fixed-income funds
11. Discuss the expected roles of Sili’s financial asset portfolio and her plan to pur -
chase real estate at the age of 30 in terms of the value of her future wealth.
12. Explain the assumptions that Sili is making regarding the change in her wealth 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 290
between the ages of 28 and 35.
13. Discuss the implications of Sili’s retirement plan with respect to the value of her 
human capital, financial capital, and total wealth, as well as with respect to the 
decumulation phase of her economic life cycle.
14. Which of the following is most likely considered investable wealth for an 
individual?
A. Checking account used for day-to-day expenses
B. Savings account representing funds not needed for day-to-day needs
C. Defined benefit pension plan participation with payments only after reach -
ing age 60
15. A client reports the following assets and liabilities in thousands:
Checking account 50
Savings account 100
Taxable investment account 200
Tax-advantaged investment account 150
Vehicles 80
Primary residence 500
Business assets 800
Short-term credit card debt 25
Business liabilities 250
The client’s investable net worth in thousands is closest to:
A. 475
B. 975
C. 1,175
16. A Gini wealth coefficient of 0.50 most likely indicates that there is:
A. perfect wealth equality.
B. greater inequality compared to a Gini coefficient of 0.35.
C. less inequality compared to a Gini coefficient of 0.35.
17. Longevity risk is most likely associated with which phase in the wealth life cycle?
A. Preretirement
B. Early retirement
C. Later retirement
18. The estimation of the value of human capital, the future income, is discounted at 
the:
A. real risk-free rate.
B. nominal risk-free rate plus a premium for inflation.
Practice Problems 291
C. nominal risk-free rate plus a premium associated with occupational income 
volatility.
19. The value of human capital tends to:
A. increase over time until retirement.
B. stay the same until retirement.
C. decrease over time until retirement.
20. Suppose a client has taxable income of EUR1,500,000. Based on the tax rate 
schedule, what is the client’s average tax rate?
Taxable income (EUR)Tax on  
column 1Percentage on excess  
over column 1 Over Up to
0 30,000 — 5
30,000 60,000 1,500 10
60,000 90,000 6,000 15
90,000 250,000 13,500 20
250,000 500,000 50,000 30
500,000 1,000,000 150,000 40
1,000,000 400,000 50
A. 27%
B. 43%
C. 50%
21. Deferred taxes on income, relative to accrual taxes,
A. decrease tax drag.
B. do not affect tax drag.
C. increase tax drag.
22. Which of the following investment parameters categories of an IPS is least likely 
to include a client’s preferences for investments that reflect his environmental 
and social concerns?
A. Asset class preferences
B. Other investment preferences
C. Constraints
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 292
SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is B because this “Other investment preferences” category 
typically includes legacy holdings such as shares of stock of a former employer 
or an investment that the client wishes to make countering the wealth manager’s 
advice.
A is incorrect because it represents a category that may include a client’s prefer -
ence for environmental and socially oriented investments. C is incorrect because 
it represents a category that may include a client’s preference for environmental 
and socially oriented investments. In fact, depending on the strength of McZhao’s 
preference, it could potentially be included in investment objectives, as well.
2. Two potentially important missing pieces of Cree’s financial background needed 
to prepare the IPS are the following:
 ■The financial background omits the tax status (i.e., taxable versus tax 
deferred) of the portfolio. As the taxation of the portfolio will have a sig -
nificant impact on the after-tax return performance necessary to conduct 
capital sufficiency analysis, this is a vitally important aspect that needs to be 
included in the IPS.
 ■Another financial factor omitted from the financial background discussion is 
whether Cree’s employment provides a pension and the expected amount of 
pension income. Future pension income may provide an important compo -
nent with respect to Cree’s financial background in the IPS.
3. The correct answer is A because medical expenses are more difficult to quantify, 
since either the funding need or the timing of the financial need, or both, may 
not be estimated. B is incorrect because the apartment building purchase can be 
reasonably estimated or quantified at the onset and can be achieved within an 
expected time horizon. C is incorrect because university expenses can be reason -
ably estimated or quantified at the onset and can be achieved within an expected 
time horizon.
4. Cree has neglected to quantify goals related to
1. His children’s university expenses, and
2. The scope of the planned apartment building purchase.
Given Cree’s goal of funding university expenses for his three children beginning 
in 10 years, these amounts may compete for funds with his planned retirement in 
17 years. By better quantifying amounts expected, McZhao can help determine 
whether the education-funding goal is consistent with the retirement-funding 
goal.
The apartment building purchase presents a short-term financial need in that 
Cree must budget for how much he is willing to spend on the building, and 
furthermore, the amount of future rental income that will be available from the 
purchased building (along with budgeted expenses to maintain the building). A 
specific plan will assist Cree in assessing whether the building purchase will be 
consistent with the longer-term goals of funding retirement and his children’s 
education.
5. Capital sufficiency analysis is the process of evaluating whether a client has suffi -
cient capital resources to determine if their current and future capital resources 
can adequately support their lifestyle, financial goals, and long-term financial 
Solutions 293
stability. Whenever the capital sufficiency analysis does not support the invest -
ment objective, the wealth manager must work with the client to revise objectives 
and create those that the wealth manager judges to be achievable. After quanti -
fying his children’s education goals and the apartment building purchase goal, a 
capital sufficiency analysis would allow Cree to assess the likelihood of being able 
to achieve each of the stated quantified goals (retirement, children’s education, 
apartment building purchase, philanthropy, and antique furniture collection). If 
his capital resources appear to be insufficient based on McZhao’s capital suffi -
ciency analysis, then Cree can choose to prioritize which goals should be adjust -
ed downward or eliminated and which are most important to maintain.
6. Retirement goal: Higher risk tolerance.
Retirement is a long-term goal with a very long time horizon given that his 
planned retirement date is in 17 years, so this time frame reflects the beginning 
of his financial needs for this goal. Cree is willing to incur a moderate drop in 
his planned expenses, so he likely has a higher risk tolerance for that goal. Cree 
is concerned about paying future medical expenses in retirement, and since his 
retirement is still 17 years in the future, he likely has a higher risk tolerance with 
the medical expenses goal, especially given that he views the planned investment 
property purchase as providing a stable income stream.
7. The solution below shows that the expected distributions of EUR48,000 are 
greater than the expected shortfall of EUR30,000. Thus, the distributions are 
expected to be more than sufficient to help Patel meet his annual income needs 
in retirement.
The expected shortfall between Patel’s retirement needs and his anticipated in -
come is equal to EUR30,000 (=200,000 – 50,000 – 120,000).
The expected after-tax distributions from his portfolio are EUR48,000, as shown 
below:
 FVA = B { [1 + r (1 – tx)]T } – 1 =
 4,000,000  { [1 + 0.02 (1 – 0.40) ]1 – 1 } = 48,000
The current value of the portfolio or basis, B, is EUR4,000,000. The before-tax 
return, r, is the 2% yield from dividends and interest. The tax rate, tx, is 40%, and 
T equals 1 to reflect the annual cash distributions to augment the shortfall. Note 
that this return ignores the after-tax return from capital appreciation, which 
would add to the excess of after-tax earnings over annual income needs.
8. To determine whether Patel should sell the securities, an analysis can be done 
to compare the expected after-tax value of the home purchase and the expected 
after-tax value of the securities portfolio at the end of the 10-year time horizon. 
To avoid additional complexity, the analysis may initially avoid considering the 
cash distributions of the securities portfolio.
If half of the securities portfolio (i.e., EUR2,000,000) is sold, then Patel will realize 
a capital gain of EUR1,500,000 (i.e., half of the capital gain of the full portfolio). 
Thus, the tax on the sale of the securities will be EUR300,000 (=20% x 1,500,000), 
and Patel will have EUR1,700,000 (=2,000,000 – 300,000) to buy the house. Alter -
natively, Patel could choose to forego buying the vacation home and maintain his 
securities portfolio for another 10 years (i.e., continue to invest EUR2,000,000).
For both alternatives, use the following equation to calculate the after-tax values:
 FVAcgb = B [(1 + r)T (1 – tcg) + tcg (B)]
For the vacation home purchase alternative, the basis ( B) is equal to 
EUR1,700,000 and the expected pretax rate of return r is equal to 8%. If the 
vacation home is foregone and the portfolio is fully reinvested, the basis is equal 
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 294
to EUR2,000,000 and the expected pretax rate of return is equal to 6.5%. In both 
cases, the time horizon ( T) is 10 years and the capital gains tax rate ( tcg) is 20%.
 After-tax value of vacation home =
 1,700,000  [(1 + 0.08)10 (1 – 0.20) + 0.20 (1,700,000/1,700,000)]  = 3,276,138
 After-tax value of reinvesting  =
 2,000,000  [(1 + 0.065)10 (1 – 0.20) + 0.20 (2,000,000/2,000,000)]  = 3,403,420
Thus, although the pretax investment return on the securities portfolio is lower 
than the pretax return on the vacation, the higher-value solution on an after-tax 
basis is to keep the securities portfolio in place. This is because a return can be 
earned on the capital gains tax amount that would have to be paid if the securi -
ties were liquidated. Patel should consider an alternative source of funding for the 
vacation home.
9. Patel requires EUR200,000 of real purchasing power throughout retirement. His 
pension income will adjust for inflation, so this amounts to EUR50,000 of real 
income. So, he needs EUR150,000 of real income from his securities portfolio 
and his small business income.
The effects of inflation on his small business income are as follows if it remains at 
a nominal amount of EUR120,000 per year:
Real business income in 10 years = 120,000 x (1 – 0.05)10 = 71,848
So, in 10 years, the inflation of 5% annually is expected to reduce the purchasing 
power of Patel’s small business income to EUR71,848. Deducting this amount 
from EUR150,000 gives a subtotal of EUR78,152.
Can the securities portfolio provide this amount of income in 10 years? Applying 
the following formula to the value of the securities portfolio:
 FVIFtx,inflation = [1 + r (1 – tx)]T – (1 – π)T
Using the capital gains appreciation of 6.5% for r, 0% for the annual tax rate, 10 
for T, and 5% for inflation ( π), we can determine the future value of the securities 
portfolio in real purchasing power terms currently.
 FVIFtx,inflation = [1 + r (1 – tx) ]T – (1 – π) T =
 [1 + 0.065 (1 – 0)]10 – (1 – 0.05)10 = 1.27840
Multiplying this amount by the current portfolio value of EUR4 million gives 
EUR5,113,600. The securities portfolio generates a 2% pretax cash distribution 
taxed annually at a 40% rate; thus, the after-tax distribution is 1.2% of the portfo -
lio value.
 Cash distribution  in real terms in 10 years = 0.012 x 5,113,600  = EUR61,363
Thus, Patel faces an income shortfall in 10 years of EUR16,789 (= 78,152 – 
61,363). To cover the shortfall, Patel may have to consider liquidating small 
portions of his securities portfolio to generate additional cash flow each year. Of 
course, such reductions will cause a decline in the value of his portfolio, thus also 
reducing future cash distributions from the portfolio, so these would have to be 
considered as well.
10. The correct answer is B. In her early career stage, the value of Sili’s human cap -
ital is significant, and she plans to begin building financial capital. Her option 
position in her employer’s stock creates an undiversified equity position, and 
her early-career stage in a high-income job suggests that she would benefit 
from additional equity exposure as long as it provides diversification relative to 
Solutions 295
her employer’s stock. Because of the start-up nature of her new employer, her 
compensation is riskier, implying that she may benefit from some fixed-income 
exposure.
A is incorrect because this investment would ensure that Sili’s financial capital 
is quite high risk, thus not providing much diversification to her employment 
compensation. C is incorrect because of her early career stage. The diversifica -
tion benefit of fixed-income investments ignores the potential for adding some 
additional equity exposure, as the value of her human capital is very high and she 
is able to take reasonable amounts of investment risk.
11. As Sili progresses in her career, the value of her human capital is likely to begin 
declining. To help offset the decline in her human capital, the value of her finan -
cial assets and real estate is likely to increase over time. Thus, these assets help 
protect the value of her future total wealth.
12. The most important assumption that Sili is making reflects a belief that one or 
more of the start-up ventures in which she invests will become quite valuable, but 
these investments will not yet be liquid during this seven-year time frame. The 
value of these business interests will account for the USD80 million difference 
between Sili’s net worth and investible net worth.
A second assumption is that the value of Sili’s financial assets will continue to 
grow significantly during the stated time period in order for investible net worth 
to reach USD20 million.
A secondary assumption that Sili may be making is that the equity in her real 
estate assets increases in value significantly.
13. While Sili’s human capital value likely declines in retirement as she ages, her 
ability to earn money from her investments and advisory work for start-ups 
may negate significant declines in the value of her human capital. However, 
eventually she may decide to make fewer investments and take on fewer adviso -
ry assignments, and at this stage, her human capital will decline in value more 
significantly.
Sili’s financial capital is likely to continue to increase as long as she remains 
effective at identifying good candidate start-ups in which to invest. As these 
companies succeed financially, Sili will continue to realize profits from these 
investments.
Eventually, she will begin converting some of her financial capital into donations 
to her philanthropic interests during the decumulation phase of her economic 
life. At this point in time, her total wealth may finally begin to decline.
14. The correct answer is B. The savings account can be used for investments, espe -
cially if the checking account is sufficient to meet ordinary expenses.
A is incorrect because this is a transactions account and may not be considered 
investable. C is incorrect because the individual does not make the investment 
decisions until payments begin, and the individual may then invest the payments 
once living expenses are covered.
15. The correct answer is A. The investable net worth in thousands is calculated as
 Investable  net worth =100 + 200 + 150 – 25 = 475.
B is incorrect because it includes the business assets and liabilities:
Investable net worth = 100 + 200 + 150 + 800 – 25 – 250 = 975. C is incorrect 
because it includes a checking account and business assets and liabilities, as well 
as nonliquid personal assets: Investable net worth = 50 + 100 + 200 + 150 + 80 + 
800 – 25 – 250 = 1,175
Learning Module 4 An Overview of Private Wealth Management 296
16. The correct answer is B. Gini coefficients range from 0 (perfect equality) to 1 
(perfect inequality). Because 0.50 is greater than 0.35, this indicates that there is 
greater inequality for the situation with a coefficient of 0.50.
A is incorrect because perfect equality would have a Gini coefficient equal to 0. C 
in incorrect because 0.50 is closer to perfect inequality (that is, a coefficient equal 
to 1.0) than a coefficient of 0.35.
17. The correct answer is C. Longevity risk is the risk of outliving one’s financial 
resources. A is incorrect because longevity risk is the risk of outliving one’s finan -
cial resources. B is incorrect because longevity risk is the risk of outliving one’s 
financial resources.
18. C is correct. A premium associated with the occupational income is added to 
the nominal interest rate. The numerator in the human capital valuation is the 
anticipated income. A is incorrect because the income that is being discounted 
is in nominal terms. B is incorrect because the nominal risk-free rate includes an 
inflation premium.
19. The correct answer is C. The value of human capital diminishes over time be -
cause this value includes projected income, so as time progresses, there is less of 
this future income included in the valuation. B is incorrect. The value of human 
capital diminishes over time because this value includes projected income, so as 
time progresses, there is less of this future income included in the valuation. A is 
incorrect. The value of human capital diminishes over time because this value in -
cludes projected income, so as time progresses, there is less of this future income 
included in the valuation.
20. The correct answer is B. The tax is
 Tax = 400,000 + 0.50(1,500,000  – 1,000,000)  = 650,000
And the average tax rate is
 Average tax rate =    650, 000 _ 1, 500, 000   = 0.4333  or 43.33% 
A is incorrect because the income over 1,000,000 is not included in the tax: 
Average tax rate =    400, 000 _ 1, 500, 000   = 02667  or 26.67 % . C is incorrect because this is the 
marginal tax rate corresponding to the highest income bracket.
21. The correct answer is A. Deferred taxes, with taxes on gains, are deferred until 
the end of the investment horizon, and the tax rate equals the tax drag on capital 
accumulation. C is incorrect because with accrual taxation, the tax drag on 
capital accumulation compounds over time. B is incorrect because accrual taxes 
create more tax drag relative to deferred taxes.
22. The correct answer is B. The “Other investment preferences” category typical -
ly includes legacy holdings such as shares of stock of a former employer or an 
investment the client wishes to make countering the wealth manager’s advice. A 
is incorrect because it represents a category that may include a client’s preference 
for environmentally and socially oriented investments. C is incorrect because it 
represents a category that may include client’s preferences for environmentally 
and socially oriented investments.
Portfolio Management for 
Institutional Investors
by Arjan Berkelaar, PhD, CFA, Kate Misic, CFA, and Peter C. Stimes, CFA.
Arjan Berkelaar, PhD, CFA, is at KAUST Investment Management Company (USA). Kate 
Misic, CFA, is at Telstra Super Pty Ltd (Australia). Peter C. Stimes, CFA, is a private 
investor in Fallbrook, California (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
discuss common characteristics of institutional investors as a group
discuss investment policy of institutional investors
discuss the stakeholders in the portfolio, the liabilities, the 
investment time horizons, and the liquidity needs of different types 
of institutional investors
describe the focus of legal, regulatory, and tax constraints affecting 
different types of institutional investors
evaluate risk considerations of private defined benefit (DB) pension 
plans in relation to 1) plan funded status, 2) sponsor financial 
strength, 3) interactions between the sponsor’s business and the 
fund’s investments, 4) plan design, and 5) workforce characteristics
evaluate the investment policy statement of an institutional investor
evaluate the investment portfolio of a private DB plan, sovereign 
wealth fund, university endowment, and private foundation
describe considerations affecting the balance sheet management of 
banks and insurersLEARNING MODULE
5
CFA Institute would like to thank 
Karl Mergenthaler, CFA, for his 
contributions to earlier drafts of 
this reading.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 298
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS: TYPES AND COMMON 
CHARACTERISTICS
discuss common characteristics of institutional investors as a group
Institutional investors are corporations, trusts, or other legal entities that invest in 
financial markets on behalf of groups or individuals, including both current and future 
generations. On a global basis, the total value of assets under management (AUM) by 
the global asset management industry as of 2020 reached more than USD100 trillion, 
and, as such, wields significant influence over capital markets.
The universe of institutional investors includes, but is not limited to, defined 
benefit and defined contribution pension plans, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, 
foundations, banks, and insurance companies. Pension plans, which account for 
approximately US$57 trillion in investable assets or roughly half of global institutional 
assets under management, include both defined benefit plans, in which the sponsor 
(employer) assumes investment risk, and defined contribution plans, in which the 
individual makes investment decisions and assumes the investment risk. Sovereign 
wealth funds, which account for about US$8 trillion in assets as of the end of 2020, 
are government-owned investment funds that invest in financial and/or real assets. 
Endowments and foundations, which account for approximately US$1.6 trillion 
in assets, manage assets on behalf of educational institutions, hospitals, churches, 
museums, and other charitable organizations. Banks and insurance companies, com -
prising net financial assets on the order of US$9 trillion, are financial intermediaries 
that balance portfolios of securities, loans, and derivatives for the purposes of (i) 
meeting the claims of depositors, counterparties, policyholders, and creditors and 
(ii) providing adequate returns to their contractual capital holders. The universe of 
institutional investors is comprised of large, complex, and sophisticated investors that 
must contend with a multitude of investment challenges and constraints.
There has been an important shift in the asset allocation of institutional investors 
over the last half century. In the 1970s, most pensions and endowments invested almost 
exclusively in domestic, fixed-income instruments. In the 1980s, many institutional 
investors began to invest in equity markets and often pursued a long-term strategic 
allocation of 60% equities/40% fixed income. In the 1990s, investors recognized the 
benefits of diversification and many made their first forays into international equity 
markets. At the turn of the 21st century, many of the world’s largest pension funds 
and endowments further diversified their portfolios and increased investments in 
alternative asset classes, including private equity, hedge funds, real estate, and other 
alternative or illiquid assets.
Meanwhile, institutional investors have seen broad shifts in their strategic invest -
ment behavior. The trend toward Liability Driven Investing (LDI), long a mainstay 
of banks and insurance companies, has taken hold among many defined benefit 
pension plans, particularly US corporate and public pension funds. Sovereign wealth 
funds have amassed significant assets over the past several decades, and many have 
implemented innovative investment approaches characterized by active management. 
Many endowments have adopted the “Endowment Model” of investing that involves 
significant exposure to alternative investments. Meanwhile, banks and insurers must 
navigate a complex and ever-changing economic and regulatory environment.
In this reading, we endeavor to put the numerous factors that affect investment 
by institutional investors into context. Section 1 discusses common characteristics 
of institutional investors as a group. Section 2 provides an overview of investment 
policies for institutional investors. Detailed coverage by institutional investor type 1
Institutional Investors: Types and Common Characteristics 299
begins with Sections 3–7, pension funds, where we discuss various factors that influ -
ence investments, including: stakeholders, liability streams, investment horizons, and 
liquidity needs; major legal, regulatory, accounting, and tax constraints; investment 
objectives and key components of Investment Policy Statements; and, finally, asset 
allocation and investment portfolios that emanate from the foregoing factors and 
constraints. Sections 8–10 follow the same approach for sovereign wealth funds, and 
Sections 11–15 do the same for university endowments and private foundations. 
Sections 16–19 covers banks and insurers and includes balance sheet management 
considerations. A summary of key points concludes the reading.
Institutional Investors: Common Characteristics
For the purposes of this reading, institutional investors include pension plans, sov -
ereign wealth funds, endowments, foundations, banks, and insurance companies. As 
we will see in upcoming sections where we cover each of these six institutional types 
in detail, their objectives and constraints can vary widely. First, in this section we 
discuss important defining characteristics of institutional investors as a group, char -
acteristics that set them apart from individual (retail and high-net-worth) investors. 
The common defining characteristics of institutional investors include the following:
1. Scale (i.e., asset size):  The issue of scale is relevant for institutional inves -
tors because it may impact investment capabilities, access to investment 
strategies, liquidity, trading costs, and other key aspects of the investment 
process.
2. Long-term investment horizon:  Institutional investors generally have a 
long-term investment horizon that is often determined by a specific liability 
stream, such as the benefit obligation of a pension plan, the spending policy 
of an endowment, or other obligations.
3. Regulatory frameworks:  Institutional investors must contend with multiple 
regulatory frameworks that frequently vary by jurisdiction and complexity 
and are often evolving.
4. Governance framework:  Institutional investors typically implement their 
investment programs through an investment office that often has a clearly 
defined governance model.
5. Principal–Agent issues:  As institutional investors manage assets on 
behalf of others, principal–agent issues must be recognized and managed 
appropriately.
We discuss these five common characteristics in more detail next.
Scale
Institutional investors’ assets under management can range from relatively small (e.g., 
less than US$25 million) to relatively large (e.g., more than US$10 billion). Smaller 
institutions may face challenges in building a diversified portfolio spanning public and 
private asset classes because they may be unable to access certain investments that 
have a high minimum investment size. For example, smaller institutions are less likely 
to be able to invest in private equity or real estate assets (i.e., property). Small insti -
tutional investors may also face challenges in hiring skilled investment professionals. 
As a result, they are more likely to outsource investments to external asset managers 
and rely on investment consultants. Larger institutional investors experience scale 
benefits that allow them access to a wider investment universe, and they can readily 
hire investment professionals. They may potentially manage part of their portfolios 
in-house if benefits outweigh costs. The largest institutional investors, however, may 
experience dis-economies of scale. For example, they might be unable to invest in 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 300
certain niche investments like venture capital (“VC”). Given the huge asset size of 
investments under management, a small allocation to VC may not generate sufficient 
returns to justify the position (including due diligence costs). The largest institutional 
investors may also be unable to deploy as much capital as desired with some external 
managers as certain investment strategies are capacity constrained. External managers 
who want to avoid jeopardizing their ability to generate superior returns will close 
the strategy to new investors. To overcome these constraints, some of the largest 
institutions buy private companies, property, and infrastructure assets directly and 
manage their traditional asset-class portfolios in-house. Large institutional investors 
also face the costs of market impact given their sizable trading orders.
Rapidly growing institutional investors may experience high cash inflow relative 
to the size of their portfolios, which requires them to continuously invest inflows and 
to maintain the appropriate asset mix (strategic asset allocation). Ensuring access 
to investments capable of absorbing their growth in assets under management may 
be challenging when investing in capacity-constrained strategies, such as small-cap 
equity or venture capital.
Long-Term Investment Horizon
Pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and foundations all typically 
have long investment horizons and relatively low liquidity needs. Cash outlays are 
relatively modest as a percent of assets under management, with net payouts typically 
around 5% or less. However, there are exceptions: For example, frozen defined benefit 
plans might be in a de-risking mode that increases their liquidity needs. Relatively low 
liquidity needs allow these institutions to invest in a broad range of alternative asset 
classes, including private equity, private real estate, natural resources, infrastructure, 
and hedge funds. Banks and insurance companies, however, tend to be much more 
asset/liability focused while operating within tight regulations designed to ensure 
adequacy of capital.
Regulatory Frameworks
Institutional investors are typically subject to different legal, regulatory, tax, and 
accounting frameworks than individual investors. These frameworks define the 
set of rules an institutional investor must follow to qualify for reduced tax rates or 
tax-exempt status. Importantly, these frameworks and rules typically differ by national 
jurisdiction in which the institutional investor operates. Some examples of important 
relevant legal, regulatory, taxation, and accounting frameworks and organizations 
include the following:
 ■United States:
 ●Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)
 ●Pension Protection Act (PPA)
 ●Uniform Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act (UPMIFA)
 ●Uniform Prudent Investor Act (UPIA)
 ●Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
 ●Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
 ●Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) set by the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
 ●Statutory Accounting Principles (SAP) set by the National Association of 
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC)
 ■United Kingdom:
 ●Pensions Act
Institutional Investors: Types and Common Characteristics 301
 ●Finance Acts (various)
 ■European Union:
 ●Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision (IORP) II
 ■South Korea:
 ●Employee Retirement Benefit Security Act
 ■Australia:
 ●Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act (SIS Act)
 ■International:
 ●International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) set by the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
 ●International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
Many relevant regulatory bodies govern and supervise institutional investors and 
their portfolios globally. The International Organization of Securities Commissions 
(IOSCO) is the international body that brings together the world's securities regulators, 
and it has 217 members. Ordinary members (127) include the national securities com -
missions or similar governmental bodies. Associate members (24) are supranational 
governmental regulators, subnational governmental regulators, intergovernmental 
international organizations, and other international standard-setting bodies. Affiliate 
members (66) include self-regulatory organizations, securities exchanges, and other 
financial market infrastructure and international regulatory bodies.
The key drivers of the legal and regulatory frameworks faced by institutional 
investors are investor protection, safety and soundness of financial institutions, and 
integrity of financial markets. Changes to these frameworks following the 2007–2009 
global financial crisis focused on leverage limits, enhanced collateral requirements, 
increased liquidity requirements, central clearing, proprietary trading limits, private 
equity limits, trading tax implementation, brokerage fee limits, compensation limits, 
and requirements for more transparent reporting. Examples of regulations focusing 
on such reforms include the following:
 ■United States:
 ●Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
(Dodd-Frank)
 ●Section 619 (12 U.S.C. Section 1851) of the Dodd-Frank Act (Volcker 
Rule)
 ●Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), which has international 
implications
 ■United Kingdom:
 ●Retail Distribution Review (RDR)
 ■European Union (with most adopted by the United Kingdom):
 ●Undertakings for the Collective Investment of Transferable Securities V 
(UCITS V)
 ●Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD)
 ●Solvency II Directive (Solvency II)
 ●Markets in Financial Instruments Directive II (MIFID II)
 ●European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR)
 ●Financial Transaction Tax (FTT)
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 302
 ●Packaged Retail Investment and Insurance Products (PRIIPs)
 ■International:
 ●Third Basel Accord / Capital Requirements Directive (Basel III / CRD 
IV)
 ●Santiago Principles (Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for 
Sovereign Wealth Funds)
 ●Principles of the Linaburg-Maduell Transparency Index (Sovereign 
Wealth Funds)
Governance Framework
Institutional investors typically operate under a formal governance structure. The gov -
ernance structure generally includes a board of directors and an investment committee. 
The board may comprise company representative directors, employee representative 
directors, and independent directors. Independent directors are usually selected to 
increase the board’s overall investment expertise. Investment committees can be 
sub-committees of the board with delegated authority to oversee investment policy. 
Alternatively, investment committees can be internal and consist of investment staff  
tasked with implementing the investment policy set by the board. The board and/or 
investment committee provide a key role in establishing the organization’s investment 
policy, defining the risk appetite, setting the investment strategy, and monitoring the 
investment performance.
The board often sets the long-term strategic asset allocation and can delegate the 
setting of medium-term tactical asset allocation to its investment staff. It may also 
delegate manager selection to investment staff. Notably though, many institutional 
investor boards will seek to retain control through overseeing hiring and firing of 
managers. Best practice suggests, however, that it is better to delegate the hiring and 
firing of external managers to investment staff to ensure that the board focuses on 
such broader issues as governance, investment policy, and strategic asset allocation.
Institutional investors typically implement their investment strategy through an 
investment office. The investment office can be structured in different ways, but the 
most common model involves a Chief Investment Officer, who is supported by a 
team of asset-class specialists or a team of generalists working across asset classes. 
Institutional investors may manage investments in-house (e.g., some large Canadian 
pension plans and Australian superannuation funds) or outsource investment man -
agement partially or entirely to external assets managers. The factors affecting the 
decision to manage assets internally include the size of assets under management, 
capability of internal resources, or a desire to pursue custom strategies not readily 
offered by external managers. It can be costly to build the capability to manage assets 
internally, so in most cases asset owners need to achieve a certain threshold of assets 
under management before the benefits outweigh the costs of internalization.
For pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and foundations, out -
sourcing elements of the investment function to external asset managers—or even 
outsourcing the entire investment operation to an outsourced chief investment officer 
(CIO) firm—is much more common than managing investments in-house. Such asset 
owners typically rely on specialized consultants to assist with asset allocation decisions 
and investment manager selection. These consultants often provide macro-economic 
forecasts and capital market assumptions for asset classes that are integral to deter -
mining the investor’s optimal asset allocation. In addition, the consultant assists in 
monitoring the large universe of external asset managers. Finally, the consultant 
may provide independent performance attribution and reporting and may monitor 
any internally managed investments and benchmark them against the external asset 
manager universe.
Overview of Investment Policy 303
In contrast, banks and insurance companies undertake most of their investing, risk 
budgeting, compliance, and balance sheet management activities internally.
Principal–Agent Issues
Institutional investors frequently experience conflicts of interest that stem from 
principal–agent issues. The principal–agent issue arises if one person, the agent, makes 
decisions on behalf of another person or institution, the principal, and their interests 
are not aligned. A dilemma exists for the agent when he/she may be motivated to act 
in his/her own best interests and not in the best interests of the principal. Because of 
operational and investment complexity, institutional investors generally rely on various 
parties (i.e., agents) to act on their behalf. Agents may be internal or external. Internal 
agents include investment committee members and investment staff. External agents 
include third-party asset managers, broker/dealers, consultants, and board members. 
A typical example of the principal–agent problem is where performance fee structures 
are designed by external fund managers to provide attractive compensation to them 
via a high base fee, which is due regardless of fund performance. This fee structure 
gives little incentive for the fund manager to produce superior performance. Such fee 
arrangements are common among hedge funds and have led to greater demand for 
fee transparency and alignment of interest between hedge fund managers and their 
clients. To manage principal–agent issues, institutional investors will typically have 
highly developed governance models and high levels of accountability with a board 
and/or investment committee typically overseeing the investment office. Such models 
should be designed to explicitly acknowledge and manage conflicts of interest and 
align the interests of all agents with those of the principals.
OVERVIEW OF INVESTMENT POLICY
discuss investment policy of institutional investors
Institutional investors codify their mission, investment objectives, and guidelines in 
an Investment Policy Statement (IPS). The IPS establishes policies and procedures for 
the effective administration and management of the institutional assets. A well-crafted 
IPS can help minimize principal–agent challenges by providing clear guidance on 
day-to-day management of the assets. Besides mission and investment objectives (i.e., 
return and risk tolerance), the IPS should cover any constraints that affect the asset 
allocation, asset allocation policy with ranges and asset class benchmarks, rebalanc -
ing policy, guidelines affecting the implementation of the asset allocation policy, and 
reporting requirements. The IPS should be reviewed annually; however, revisions 
should be infrequent, such as when material changes occur in investor circumstances 
and/or the market environment, as the IPS serves as the foundation for the investment 
program. The asset allocation policy and investment guidelines are typically included 
in an appendix that can be modified more easily.
Investment objectives flow from the organization’s overall mission. For banks and 
insurance companies, the investment objective is to maximize net present value by 
balancing (i) the expected returns on assets, (ii) the expected cost of liabilities, (iii) 
the overall risks of assets and liabilities, and (iv) the economic relationships between 
and among assets and liabilities.
The investment objectives are more straightforward for the other types of institu -
tions covered in this reading. For example, the overall objective of a DB pension fund 
might be to maintain a funded ratio in excess of 100%; for an endowment, it may be 2
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 304
to maintain long-term purchasing power while providing needed financial support to 
its university. Investment objectives are typically expressed as a desired return target 
over the medium-to-long term (which should be clearly specified) with an acceptable 
level of risk. This return target should be evaluated in the context of the organization’s 
overall mission and should be tied to the evaluation of liabilities (e.g., discount rate 
used to value DB pension plan liabilities or spending rate for an endowment). When 
expressing the return target in real terms, the relevant inflation metric must be defined. 
For example, GIC—Singapore’s sovereign wealth fund—uses global inflation defined 
as G3 (the US, Japan, and Eurozone) inflation, while some US endowments use the 
Higher Education Price Index (HEPI) published by Commonfund (an independent 
asset management firm serving non-profit organizations and promoting best practices 
among institutional investors).
Investment objectives and return targets must be consistent with an organization’s 
risk tolerance and other constraints. Risk tolerance can be expressed in different ways, 
such as for:
 ■DB pension funds: surplus volatility (standard deviation of asset returns in 
excess of liability returns);
 ■Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs): probability of investment losses (or proba -
bility of not maintaining purchasing power) over a certain time period;
 ■Endowments and foundations: volatility of total returns (standard deviation 
of total returns); and
 ■Banks and insurance companies: value at risk (VaR) or conditional VaR 
(CVaR) and comprehensive, scenario-based stress tests.
Finally, constraints (legal, regulatory, tax, and accounting) have a bearing on 
investment objectives and should be incorporated into the design of an investment 
policy. For example, constraints might limit the scope of acceptable risk and available 
asset classes.
Once the investment objectives—the desired risk and return characteristics—
have been established, a strategic asset allocation or policy portfolio is designed. The 
investment portfolio of an institutional investor is designed to meet its objectives 
and should reflect the appropriate risk and liquidity considerations addressed in the 
IPS. For example, a large allocation to private equity is probably not appropriate for 
institutions with a relatively short investment horizon and high liquidity requirements. 
Similarly, a large fixed-income allocation might not be appropriate for an institution 
with a long investment horizon and low liquidity requirements. While institutional 
investors each have unique liability characteristics, several investment approaches 
have emerged over the past couple of years. Broadly speaking, these can be grouped 
into four different approaches:
1. Norway model  popularized by Norway’s global pension fund, Government 
Pension Fund Global (GPFG). The Norway model is characterized by an 
almost exclusive reliance on public equities and fixed income (the tradi -
tional 60/40 equity/bond model falls under the Norway model), with largely 
passively managed assets and with very little to no allocation to alternative 
investments. Investments are usually managed with tight tracking error 
limits. The advantages of this approach are that investment costs/fees are 
low, investments are transparent, the risk of poor manager selection is low, 
and there is little complexity for a governing board. The disadvantage is that 
there is limited potential for value-added (i.e., alpha from security selection 
skills) above-market returns. However, Norway’s GPFG has begun to seek 
additional value over market-capitalization benchmarks by attempting to 
capture systematic risk factors.
Overview of Investment Policy 305
2. Endowment model  popularized by the Yale Endowment. The endowment 
model is characterized by a high allocation to alternative investments 
(private investments and hedge funds), significant active management, and 
externally managed assets. This investment approach stands in almost direct 
contrast to the Norway model. Although labeled ‘endowment model, ’ this 
investment approach is not only followed by many university endowments 
and foundations but also by several sovereign wealth funds and defined 
benefit pension funds. The endowment model is appropriate for institutional 
investors that have a long-term investment horizon, high risk tolerance, 
relatively small liquidity needs, and skill in sourcing alternative investments 
(the nature of alternative investments is such that there is large variation 
between the worst and best performing asset managers, and selecting the 
right manager is therefore critically important). The endowment model is 
difficult to implement for small institutional investors as they might not be 
able to access high quality managers. It might also be difficult to implement 
for very large institutional investors because of their very large footprint. 
The endowment model is more expensive in terms of costs/fees compared 
to the Norway model.
3. Canada model  popularized by the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board 
(CPPIB). The Canada model, just like the endowment model, is charac -
terized by a high allocation to alternatives. Unlike the endowment model, 
however, the Canada model relies more on internally managed assets. The 
innovative features of the Canada model are the: a) reference portfolio, b) 
total portfolio approach, and c) active management. The reference portfolio 
is a passive mix of public equities, fixed income, and cash that represents 
a cheap and easily implementable portfolio that is expected to achieve the 
long-term expected return consistent with the institution’s investment 
objectives and risk appetite. The reference portfolio effectively defines a 
transparent, risk-equivalent benchmark for the investment portfolio, and 
serves as a low-cost alternative to the fund’s actual portfolio. The reference 
portfolio might be different from the institution’s strategic asset allocation 
or policy portfolio. Importantly, the reference portfolio is typically made 
up of only publicly traded securities (in the form of common public market 
indices in equities and fixed income) that can be more easily understood by 
the governing board, while the strategic asset allocation may include target 
allocations to private markets and hedge funds. The total portfolio approach 
is the method of constructing the portfolio to ensure that planned risk expo -
sures at the total portfolio level are maintained as individual investments 
enter, leave or change in value. It is an approach that is aimed at minimizing 
the unintended exposures and uncompensated risks that may arise as added 
value is sought by extending investments beyond the reference portfolio. 
For example, if private equity is added, management considers that it is 
leveraged equity and as a result the exposure to public equities needs to 
be reduced by more than the proposed allocation to private equity and 
the allocation to fixed-income needs to be increased to offset the leverage. 
Although the Canada model starts with a passive reference portfolio, it is 
important to note that the Canada model employs active management from 
tilting asset allocation through to stock selection. A good example of a sov -
ereign wealth fund that has embraced the concept of the reference portfolio 
is the New Zealand Superannuation Fund.
4. Liability Driven Investing (LDI) Model  has gained significant importance, 
particularly among corporate defined benefit pension plans in the United 
States, although some of the European pension funds—particularly in 
Denmark and in the Netherlands—adopted the LDI concept even prior to 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 306
the 2007–2009 global financial crisis. In the LDI model, the primary invest -
ment objective is to generate returns sufficient to cover liabilities. As such, 
the investor’s focus shifts away from operating in an asset-only context, to a 
focus on maximizing expected surplus return (excess return of assets over 
liabilities) and managing surplus volatility. Although the implementation 
and resultant asset allocation may vary significantly, LDI portfolios—other 
than for banks and insurance institutions—typically have a significant expo -
sure to long duration fixed-income securities. In some LDI implementa -
tions, institutional investors separate their portfolios into a hedging portfo -
lio (this portfolio usually hedges the main risk factor in the liabilities, which 
is interest rate risk) and a return-generating portfolio (this portfolio needs 
to generate sufficient returns to offset the growth rate of liabilities, other 
than changes in the discount rate). The hedging portfolio for defined ben -
efit pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, and endowments/foundations 
usually consists of long duration fixed-income securities and may entail the 
use of derivatives, such as interest rate swaps, to extend the duration of the 
portfolio. The return-generating portfolio usually includes public equities 
and alternative investments.
Exhibit 1  summarizes these four investment approaches.
Exhibit 1: Common Investment Approaches Used by Institutional Investors
Investment 
Approach Description
Norway Model Traditional style characterized by 60%/40% equity/fixed-income allocation, few alternatives, largely pas -
sive investments, tight tracking error limits, and benchmark as a starting position.  
Pros : Low cost, transparent, suitable for large scale, easy for board to understand.  
Cons : Limited value-added potential.
Endowment Model Characterized by high alternatives exposure, active management and outsourcing.  
Pros : High value-added potential.  
Cons : Expensive and difficult to implement for most sovereign wealth funds because of their large asset 
sizes.
Canada Model Characterized by high alternatives exposure, active management, and insourcing.  
Pros : High value-added potential and development of internal capabilities.  
Cons : Potentially expensive and difficult to manage.
LDI Model Characterized by focus on hedging liabilities and interest rate risk including via duration-matched, 
fixed-income exposure. A growth component in the return-generating portfolio is also typical (excep -
tions being bank and insurance company portfolios).  
Pros : Explicit recognition of liabilities as part of the investment process.  
Cons : Certain risks (e.g., longevity risk, inflation risk) may not be hedged.
PENSION FUNDS: TYPES AND STAKEHOLDERS
Pension funds are long-term saving and investment plans designed to accumulate 
sufficient assets to provide for the financial needs of retirees. There are two main 
types of pension plans: defined benefit , in which a plan sponsor commits to paying 
a specified retirement benefit, and defined contribution , in which contributions are 
defined but the ultimate retirement benefit is not specified or guaranteed by the plan 3
Pension Funds: Types and Stakeholders 307
sponsor. Globally, there are many variations and nuances of these two broad categories 
of pension plans. Exhibit 2  compares the key features of defined benefit and defined 
contribution pension plans.
Exhibit 2: Comparison of Defined Benefit and Defined Contribution Pension Plan Features
Characteristics/Features Defined Benefit Pension Plan Defined Contribution Pension Plan
Benefit payments Benefit payouts are defined by a contract 
between the employee and the pension plan 
(payouts are often calculated as a percentage 
of salary).Benefit payouts are determined by the 
performance of investments selected by the 
participant.
Contributions The employer is the primary contributor, 
though the employee may contribute as well. 
The size of contributions is driven by several 
key factors, including performance of invest -
ments selected by the pension fund.The employee is typically the primary 
contributor—although the employer may con -
tribute as well or may have a legal obligation 
to contribute a percentage of the employee’s 
salary.
Investment decision making The pension fund determines how much to 
save and what to invest in to meet the plan 
objectives.The employee determines how much to save 
and what to invest in to meet his/her objec -
tives (from the available menu of investment 
vehicles selected by the plan sponsor).
Investment risk The employer bears the risk that the liabilities 
are not met and may be required to make addi -
tional contributions to meet any shortfall.The employee bears the risk of not meeting 
his/her objectives for this account in terms of 
funding retirement.
Mortality/Longevity risk Mortality risk is pooled. If a beneficiary passes 
away early, he/she typically leaves a portion of 
unpaid benefits in the pool offsetting addi -
tional benefit payments required by beneficia -
ries that live longer than expected. As a result, 
the individual does not bear any of the risk of 
outliving his/her retirement benefits.The employee bears the risk of not meeting his/
her objectives for this account in terms of fund -
ing retirement. The employee bears longevity 
risk.
Source:  World Economic Forum, “ Alternative Investments 2020: The Future of Alternative Investments” 
(2015).
Pension funds are significant players in the global investment landscape. Over the 
past 20 years, there has been a move away from defined benefit (DB) plans (especially 
non-government DB plans) to defined contribution (DC) plans. Among drivers of this 
shift are DC plans’ lower financial risk for plan sponsors, absence of risk of becoming 
underfunded, and ease of portability (simplifies job mobility). Willis Towers Watson 
reports in its “Global Pension Assets Study 2018” covering the seven largest pension 
markets, the “P7” (Australia, Canada, Japan, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States) that during the past 20 years DC pension plans have 
risen from 33% to 49% of total plan assets.
The split between DB and DC plans can vary significantly from country to coun -
try. One of the challenges of classifying countries by this split is that many countries 
offer hybrid pension plans, such as that in Switzerland where defined contribution 
connotes a cash balance plan in which all assets are pooled and the plan sponsor 
shares the investment risk. There are basically no pure DC plans in Switzerland. 
Exhibit 3  presents the split between DB and DC plans for the P7 countries. Together 
these countries comprise more than 90% of worldwide pension assets. Note that a 
substantial difference exists between countries. Some countries (such as Australia) 
rely almost exclusively on DC plans, while others (such as Japan and the Netherlands) 
predominantly use DB plans.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 308
Exhibit 3: Split Between DB or Hybrid Plans and DC Plans in Select 
Countries (2021)
86%64%19%6%39%5%
14%36%81%94%61%95%
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 120%AustraliaUnited StatesUnited KingdomNetherlandsCanadaJapan
DC DB
Source : Willis Towers Watson Thinking Ahead Institute (2021) .
Stakeholders
Many entities are involved with institutional retirement plans. These include the 
employer, employees, retirees, unions, management, the investment committee and/or 
board, and shareholders. Governments have generally encouraged pension plans as a 
tool to assist individuals to build sufficient financial resources to fund their retirement 
needs. Government support typically comes in the form of favorable tax treatment 
for both companies and individuals who contribute to or manage pension plans, 
provided they operate according to local pension plan regulations. The government 
and taxpayers will bear some of the shortfall risks (in terms of added welfare or social 
security payments) in instances of employers failing to pay agreed on defined benefit 
payments and where individuals fail to accumulate sufficient wealth for retirement.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
The stakeholders of a defined benefit pension plan are the employer [typically referred 
to as the plan sponsor and usually represented by management and the Chief Financial 
Officer (CFO)]; plan beneficiaries (employees and retirees); the Chief Investment 
Officer (CIO) and investment staff; the investment committee and/or board; and the 
government, unions, and shareholders in the case of corporate DB plans. Defined 
benefits promised to beneficiaries create liabilities for the plan sponsor. In operating 
the pension plan, the sponsor and investment staff must make investment decisions 
in the interest of the ultimate beneficiaries (employees and retirees). Defined benefit 
pension liabilities are typically funded from two sources: 1) employer and employee 
contributions and 2) investment returns on funded assets. Employee contributions 
can be fixed or variable, but employer contributions usually vary depending on the 
plan’s funded status. Although each of the stakeholders has a strong interest in plan 
assets being invested appropriately, opinions might differ over the acceptable level of 
investment risk and the magnitude of employer contributions to the plan.
The plan sponsor may have an interest in 1) minimizing employer contributions 
due to budget constraints and/or 2) managing the volatility of employer contributions 
(by aiming for less volatility in investment returns). This allows management to plan 
future contributions with less uncertainty. Management and the CFO may also want 
to manage the impact of pension assets and liabilities on the sponsor’s balance sheet. 
Employees and retirees, however, want to maximize the probability that plan liabilities 
Pension Funds: Types and Stakeholders 309
are met and thus want the sponsor to make timely and sufficient plan contributions. 
Finally, the CIO and investment staff should be interested in meeting the investment 
objectives and constraints of the investment policy statement.
In a defined benefit pension plan, the sponsor bears the ultimate risk of the port -
folio falling short of meeting liabilities. This risk manifests itself in the form of higher 
contributions from the plan sponsor when the plan becomes underfunded. In the 
extreme case of default, however—when the plan sponsor can no longer meet its legal 
obligations and cannot contribute further to the plan—the employee bears the ultimate 
risk and may need to find alternative means to meet financial needs in retirement. 
Some of this risk may be shared by taxpayers via additional social security or welfare 
payments, making the government a stakeholder in a defined benefit pension plan.1
The investment office of the DB pension plan is tasked with investing assets 
appropriately and may have variable compensation (bonuses) tied to investment per -
formance. The investment committee or board will consider recommendations from 
investment staff, such as setting strategy and investment manager selection. In setting 
and executing strategy, all stakeholders’ positions must be considered, including the 
sponsor’s ability to make plan contributions. Ultimately, however, the board has a 
fiduciary duty to employees and retirees.
Finally, for corporate DB plans the company’s shareholders are stakeholders. They 
are interested in the sustainability of the pension plan because if it is underfunded, 
any shortfall becomes a liability on the balance sheet, reducing the value of the com -
pany. Contributions to an underfunded plan also reduce net income. Underfunded 
status also increases financial risk, which may cause higher volatility in the stock price.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The main stakeholders of a defined contribution pension plan are the plan beneficia -
ries, the employer, the board, and the government.
A key stakeholder in a DC plan is the participant. Each participant has an indi -
vidual account into which contributions are made on a regular basis—either by the 
employee, the employer, or both. Plan participants must ensure that 1) adequate con -
tributions are made and 2) appropriate investment options are selected to generate 
sufficient investment returns. For a DC pension plan, the individual participant bears 
the investment risk of the portfolio failing to meet future liabilities (i.e., retirement 
needs). If plan participants outlive their savings, they will need to find other ways to 
meet their financial needs in retirement. In that case, the government (via taxpayers) 
may need to provide additional social welfare benefits, making the government another 
stakeholder in a DC plan.
Although DC plan participants control the investment decisions for their individual 
accounts, perhaps acting upon the advice of their financial adviser, the plan sponsor 
still has important fiduciary responsibilities, including overseeing the appropriate 
investment of plan assets (either by internal staff or by third-party asset manag -
ers or a combination thereof), offering suitable investment options, and selecting 
administrative providers. The plan sponsor, therefore, is an important stakeholder 
in a DC plan. The plan sponsor typically has an obligation to contribute to the DC 
plan on behalf of the employee as specified by the employment contract or through 
a government-mandated system. In some countries, a plan sponsor may also have 
an obligation to provide employees with a choice of different investment options 
within the employer-sponsored DC plan or even the choice of different DC plans. 
The sponsor typically must ensure that the investment options provide appropriate 
1 Some risk is also shared by other plan sponsors through agencies as the Pension Benefit Guaranty 
Corporation (PBGC) in the United States. It is not funded by the government; rather, PBGC’s funding 
comes primarily from insurance premiums paid by DB plan sponsors, the assets of failed pension plans 
that the PBGC takes over, and investment income.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 310
levels of diversification. It may also need to provide investment education and com -
munications so that employees can make well informed investment choices. Running 
DC plans can be more expensive than DB plans given their increased complexity of 
administration and meeting regulatory compliance, all of which may result in higher 
fees for DC plan participants.
The board of a DC plan sponsor must consider the differing levels of sophisti -
cation among participants and provide adequate disclosure in communications to 
ensure participants are well informed. The board may be required to select a default 
investment option when participants do not explicitly make an investment choice. In 
such cases, the board has a higher obligation because by entering the default option, 
the participant is indicating that he/she either does not have sufficient understanding 
to make an informed choice or that he/she trusts the board of the pension plan to 
make the best choice.
PENSION FUNDS: LIABILITIES, INVESTMENT 
HORIZON, AND LIQUIDITY NEEDS
discuss the stakeholders in the portfolio, the liabilities, the 
investment time horizons, and the liquidity needs of different types 
of institutional investors
Liabilities and Investment Horizon
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
The liabilities of a DB pension plan are the present value of the future payments it will 
make to beneficiaries upon retirement, disability, or death. Calculating DB liabilities 
is complex and typically undertaken by actuaries employed by the plan sponsor or by 
external actuaries. Here we will highlight some key elements and focus on the discount 
rate used in calculating the present value of future benefit payments.
The first step in determining DB liabilities is to calculate the expected future 
cash flows (i.e., retirement benefits). These depend on the design and specifics of the 
pension plan. Some of the key elements common among DB plans in the calculation 
of expected cash flows are:
1. Service/tenure:  The number of years the employee has been with the 
company or organization (or service years) determines the defined benefit 
the employee is expected to receive upon retirement. The higher the service 
years, the higher the retirement benefit. Sometimes a minimum number of 
service years is required before retirement benefits become vested (i.e., the 
employee becomes eligible to receive a pension).
2. Salary/earnings:  The salary or earnings level of the employee affects the 
calculation of the defined benefit the employee is expected to receive upon 
retirement. The defined benefit may be a function of the average earnings 
over the entire career or the average earnings over the last several years 
prior to retirement (e.g., last three years).
3. Mortality/longevity:  The length of time that retirement benefits are 
expected to be paid to plan participants is important in calculating expected 
cash flows. This requires assumptions about employees’ and retirees’ life 4
Pension Funds: Liabilities, Investment Horizon, and Liquidity Needs 311
expectancies. Importantly, ever-increasing life expectancies is a key factor 
in making DB pension plans less affordable from the sponsor’s perspective. 
Longevity risk is the risk to the plan sponsor that participants will live lon -
ger than assumed in the pension liabilities calculations.
In estimating future benefits, the plan sponsor must make several key assumptions, 
such as the growth rate of salaries, expected vesting, and mortality and disability 
assumptions. Vesting  means that employees only become eligible to receive a pension 
after meeting certain criteria, typically a minimum number of years of service. In mea -
suring defined benefit obligations, the plan sponsor must consider the likelihood that 
some employees may not satisfy the vesting requirements. Under both International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and US generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP), pension obligations are determined as the present value of future benefits 
earned by employees for service provided to date. Assumptions about future salary 
increases, expected vesting, and life expectancy change over time and will change the 
estimated pension obligation. Given the importance of these factors, pension plans 
require periodic actuarial reviews to determine the value of the liabilities and the 
sponsor’s annual required contribution rate.
Once expected future benefits are calculated, they must be discounted to determine 
their present value. Practices of marking-to-market liabilities using market discount 
rates can vary considerably based on country, or even within a country, between private 
and public pension plans. Typical discount rates include government bond yields or 
swap rates, corporate bond yields, and constant actuarial discount rates (long-term 
expected rate of return). Plan sponsors might be inclined to use a higher discount rate 
that will, all else equal, result in lower pension liabilities, a better funded status, and 
potentially lower contributions. Beneficiaries prefer to see a lower discount rate being 
used that will, all else equal, result in higher pension liabilities, a worse funded status, 
and potentially higher contributions. There is a delicate balance, however, because if 
contributions become unsustainable, the plan sponsor might decide to shut down its 
DB plan and substitute it with a less risky DC plan.
Over the past 15 years, a shift has occurred in many countries toward tying the 
discount rate to market rates. As a result, many pension plans have adopted a more 
liability-driven investment approach to partially or fully hedge the interest rate risk in 
their liabilities. Given the low interest rate environment since the 2007–2009 financial 
crisis, this has posed tremendous challenges for pension funds globally.
 
Discount Rates for Defined Benefit Plans in the US
In the United States, private and corporate DB pension plans may discount 
liabilities at rates based on high-grade bond yields averaged over 25 years. This 
was allowed under the 2012 update to the Pension Protection Act (PPA), part 
of broader legislation known as MAP-21. The change effectively raised the 
applicable discount rates (and reduced DB pension liabilities), providing some 
relief to defined benefit plans given what were perceived to be ‘artificially’ low 
interest rates. Prior to the PPA, corporate DB plans had to discount liabilities 
using current investment-grade corporate bond yields, not a historical average.
US public DB pension plans use actuarial discount rates which, as required 
by the US Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB), are based on the 
expected return of the pension plan asset portfolio. These are typically far higher 
than bond rates. The higher discount rates lower their liabilities and raise their 
funded status. However, this may cause such pension plans to potentially make 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 312
inadequate plan contributions and take on excessive risk by investing heavily in 
equities and alternatives in hope of generating an expected rate of return that 
supports the high discount rate.
Exhibit 4  summarizes the key elements in the calculation of defined benefit pen -
sion plan liabilities.
Exhibit 4: Factors Affecting Calculation of Defined Benefit Liabilities
Factor Impact on Liabilities
Service/tenure Depending on plan design, often the longer the period of ser -
vice or tenure, the larger the benefit payments.
Salary/earnings The faster salaries or earnings grow, the larger the benefit 
payments.
Additional or matching 
contributionsAdditional or matching contributions are often rewarded by a 
step change increase in benefit payments.
Mortality/Longevity 
assumptionsIf life expectancy increases, the obligations or liabilities will 
increase.
Expected Vesting If employee turnover decreases, expected vesting will increase.
Expected Investment 
ReturnsIn some cases, increases in expected returns will result in a 
higher discount rate being used—hence, lower obligations or 
liabilities.
Discount Rate A higher (lower) discount rate results in lower (higher) 
liabilities.
The main objective of a DB plan is to have sufficient assets to cover future benefit 
payments. A common pension industry metric used to gauge asset sufficiency is the 
funded ratio, also known as the vested benefit index (VBI) in some countries. The 
funded ratio is defined as:
 Funded ratio = Fair value of plan assets/PV of Defined benefit obligations
In some countries, if the funded ratio is less than 100%, the sponsor must increase 
contributions until it exceeds 100%. Improving the plan’s funded ratio can transform 
the pension obligation from a liability to an asset on the plan sponsor’s balance sheet. 
It is important to note that in some cases, underfunded pension plans may take more 
investment risk in the hope of achieving higher returns and growing assets sufficiently 
to return to fully funded status. In other cases, underfunded pension plans reduce 
investment risk and rely on other actions to improve their funded status, such as 
increasing contributions or reducing benefits.
Additional considerations in DB pension design are:
1. the size of the pension plan relative to the size of the sponsor’s balance 
sheet; and
2. the cyclicality of the plan sponsor’s core business.
If plan assets and liabilities are small relative to the sponsor’s balance sheet, then 
there may be more flexibility in taking investment risk and more tolerance for volatility 
in employer contributions. If, on the other hand, plan asset and liabilities are large in 
relation to the sponsor’s balance sheet, then there may be less appetite for volatility 
of employer contributions and hence a reduced desire for taking investment risk.
Another important factor is the core business of the plan sponsor. If the plan 
sponsor’s revenues are highly cyclical, it will not want plan funded status to deteriorate 
when the core business suffers from a cyclical downturn. In such cases, the DB plan’s 
Pension Funds: Liabilities, Investment Horizon, and Liquidity Needs 313
asset allocation would be modified to ensure adequate diversification so as not to 
have significant exposure to assets highly correlated with the sponsor’s core business 
or industry. In sum, it is desirable for plan assets to have low (high) correlations with 
the sponsor’s operating assets (liabilities).
The plans sponsor’s ability to tolerate volatility of contribution rates may impact 
the investment horizon, and hence the pension plan’s appetite for such illiquid invest -
ments as private equity and venture capital. Another important factor determining 
the investment horizon is the mix of active plan participants (i.e., current employ -
ees) versus retirees. The higher the proportion of retirees (so the higher the liability 
associated with retirees only) relative to the proportion of active participants (or the 
liability associated with active participants), the more mature the plan—hence, the 
lower its risk tolerance. Some mature DB pension plans have been frozen (closed to 
new participants) as they typically experience negative cash flow where benefit pay -
ments exceed contributions. Generally, the more mature a pension fund, the shorter 
its investment horizon, which directly affects risk tolerance and the allocation between 
fixed-income assets and riskier assets.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
In a DC plan, participants’ pension benefits are based on amounts credited to their 
individual accounts in the form of contributions (from the employee and possibly 
the employer) and investment returns. Consequently, the liabilities of a DC pension 
plan sponsor are equal only to its required contributions. DC plan assets are typically 
pooled, and the sponsor invests according to the investment choices selected by plan 
participants. Often the DC plan may invest in a broadly diversified portfolio that may 
include investments not generally offered to retail investors, such as private equity 
and hedge funds. This is possible since pooling of assets gives rise to scale and the 
long-term horizon of the aggregate beneficiaries. In such case, the plan sponsor takes 
on the residual investment risk of its asset allocation. Once invested in such alternative 
asset types, the DC plan sponsor bears liquidity risk if any event occurs that causes 
a significant proportion of its participants to exit the plan. The asset allocation may 
be impacted to such an extent that the plan sponsor is unable to provide the asset 
allocation promised to its participants. Such a circumstance will have regulatory and 
reputational consequences for the DC plan sponsor.
Individuals in a DC plan are at different stages of their careers, so each has a differ -
ent investment time horizon (the time period from his/her current age until expected 
death or expected death of a spouse, whichever is longer) as well as different risk 
tolerances. Therefore, key considerations for most DC plans are participants’ ages and 
invested balances. If the plan has a larger proportion of older (younger) participants 
with large (small) invested balances, the investment options might reflect a shorter 
(longer) investment horizon. Many DC plans offer investment options that allow par -
ticipants to select the investment horizon that best aligns with their own investment 
horizon. Examples are life-cycle options or target date options, which feature a glide 
path that manages the asset mix based on a desired retirement date. In the United 
States, most DC plans offer target-date options as default options; in Hong Kong SAR 
it is mandated that every default option plan have a life-cycle option.
There are two main types of life-cycle options. Participant-switching life-cycle 
options  automatically switch members into a more conservative asset mix as their 
age increases. There may be several automatic de-risking switches at different age 
targets. A participant/cohort option  pools the participant with a cohort that has a 
similar target retirement date. For example, if a participant is 40 years old in 2020 and 
plans to retire at the age of 65, he/she could invest in an option with a target date of 
2045 and the fund would manage the appropriate asset mix over the next 25 years. In 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 314
2020, the assets might be 90% invested in equities and 10% in bonds. As time passes, 
however, the fund would gradually change the asset mix (less equities and more bonds) 
to reflect an appropriate allocation given the time to retirement.
Liquidity Needs
Although pension plans typically have long investment time horizons, they still must 
maintain sufficient liquidity relative to their projected liabilities. Liquidity needs are 
driven by:
 ■Proportion of active employees relative to retirees—The former contribute 
to the plan, while the latter receive benefit payments. More mature pension 
funds have higher liquidity needs. Frozen DB pension plans, often facing 
negative cash flow, must hold even more cash and other liquid investments 
compared to open mature plans.
 ■Age of workforce—Liquidity needs rise as the age of the workforce 
increases, since the closer participants are, on average, to retirement, the 
sooner they will switch from the contribution phase to benefit payment 
stage. This is true for both DB and DC plans.
 ■DB plan funded status—If the plan is well funded, the plan sponsor may 
reduce contributions, generating a need to hold higher balances of liquid 
assets to pay benefits.
 ■Ability of participants to switch/withdraw from plan—If pension plan 
participants can switch to another plan or withdraw on short notice, then 
higher balances of liquid assets must be held to facilitate these actions. This 
applies to DB and some DC plans.
A pension plan with lower liquidity needs can hold larger balances in private 
investments—such as real estate, infrastructure, private equity, and hedge funds 
—and can invest a higher proportion in equities and credit. A pension plan with 
higher liquidity needs, however, must invest a higher proportion of its assets in cash, 
government bonds, and highly liquid, investment-grade corporate bonds.
It is important for pension plans to regularly perform liquidity stress tests, which 
may include stressing the value of their assets and modelling reduced liquidity of 
certain asset classes in a market downturn. Such stress-testing may also help DC 
plans anticipate whether participants might switch out of more volatile investment 
options during market downturns.
EXAMPLE 1
Comparing Defined Benefit (DB) and Defined 
Contribution (DC) Pension Plans
1. Geoff Albright is 35 years old and has been working at Henley Consulting 
in Melbourne, Australia, for 10 years. Henley Consulting offers a defined 
benefit (DB) pension plan for its employees. The defined benefit plan is fully 
funded. Geoff Albright’s benefit formula for monthly payments upon retire -
ment is: final monthly salary × benefit percentage (=1.5%) × number of years 
of service, where final monthly salary equals his average monthly earnings 
for the last three financial years immediately prior to retirement date. Hav -
Pension Funds: Liabilities, Investment Horizon, and Liquidity Needs 315
ing been at Henley Consulting for 10 years, his benefits have vested and can 
be transferred to another pension plan.
Geoff has been offered a job at rival Australian firm, Horizon Ventures 
Consulting, which is offering a similar salary; however, Horizon Ventures 
Consulting offers a defined contribution (DC) pension plan for its employ -
ees. Horizon Ventures Consulting will pay 15% of annual salary into the 
plan each year. Employees can choose to invest in one of three diversified 
portfolios offered by the plan sponsor—Horizon Growth, Horizon Balanced, 
and Horizon Conservative—based upon their risk appetite, and employees 
can elect to make additional contributions to the plan. The monthly pension 
payments will depend on what has accumulated in Geoff’s account when he 
retires.
Discuss the features that Geoff should consider in evaluating the two plans. 
Please address benefit payments, contributions, shortfall risk, and mortality/
longevity risks.
Solution:
 ■Geoff notes his benefits at Henley Consulting have vested and can be 
transferred to Horizon Ventures Consulting’s DC plan.
 ■Henley Consulting’s plan provides a defined benefit payment linked 
to years of service and final salary, whereas Horizon Ventures 
Consulting’s plan provides an uncertain benefit payment linked to the 
company’s and Geoff’s contribution rates and investment performance 
of plan assets. The benefits he can achieve in Henley Consulting’s DB 
plan increase both by time employed as well as by growth in his wages. 
Geoff considers his capacity to achieve wage growth and compares 
this to the return objectives of his chosen option in Horizon Ventures 
Consulting’s DC plan. Geoff notes his risk appetite and time horizon 
are suited to the Horizon Growth option.
 ■Although Henley Consulting’s contribution rate is not known, Geoff 
is aware that the plan is currently fully funded and that it is Henley 
Consulting’s obligation to maintain a fully funded status. Horizon 
Ventures Consulting’s contribution rate is known (15% of annual sal -
ary), and Geoff can also make additional contributions himself.
 ■Geoff notes that the shortfall risk of plan assets being insufficient 
to meet his retirement benefit payments falls to his employer in 
the case of Henley Consulting’s DB plan. But, for Horizon Ventures 
Consulting’s DC plan, the shortfall risk falls to Geoff and depends 
on the contribution rate (15% from the company plus any additional 
contributions he chooses to make) and the performance of his chosen 
investments.
 ■Henley’s DB plan pools mortality risk such that those in the pool who 
die prematurely leave assets that help fund benefit payments for those 
who live longer than expected. Horizon Venture Consulting’s DC plan 
pays out the amount accumulated in Geoff’s account, and he bears the 
risk of outliving his savings.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 316
PENSION FUNDS: EXTERNAL CONSTRAINTS
describe the focus of legal, regulatory, and tax constraints affecting 
different types of institutional investors
In this section, we take a high-level view of some of the legal and regulatory con -
straints faced by pension funds. In the next section, we consider tax and accounting 
constraints that may affect investing by pension funds.
Legal and Regulatory Constraints
Regulatory bodies supervising pension funds typically cover financial services licensing 
and regulation, prudential supervision, capital adequacy, market integrity, and con -
sumer protection. Breeching key regulations may result in loss of operating licenses 
and/or loss of tax benefits, where applicable, which provides a strong incentive to 
comply. Regulations do vary from country to country; for example, some countries 
specify minimum and maximum percentage allocations to certain asset classes, while 
other countries require a minimum contribution rate by employers, particularly if the 
plan’s funded ratio falls below 100%. However, despite national differences, there are 
similar themes in regulation globally.
Reporting and transparency are heavily influenced by regulatory requirements, 
as some regulators now require extensive reporting, not only on direct investment 
fees and costs incurred by pension plans but also on indirect fees and costs of exter -
nal commingled vehicles. Drivers of more detailed reporting and transparency are 
avoidance of corruption by government officials involved with public pension plans 
and increased consumer protection for private pension plans so participants and 
stakeholders make appropriate investment choices. Many countries have increased 
personal liability for pension trustees to ensure they act in the best interests of ultimate 
beneficiaries. For example, DC plan participants must choose their contribution rates 
and the investment risk they are willing to bear. However, regulators are aware that 
many DC plan participants have little understanding of how to invest for retirement. 
Although regulators may require the plan sponsor to provide investor education to 
their employees, DC plan trustees, as fiduciaries, are still required to operate with 
prudence and as if they were the asset owners.
In Australia, for example, most employees are covered by the DC Superannuation 
Guarantee, under which employers must contribute 9.5% of an employee’s salary. Since 
many participants do not actively make investment decisions, the government applies 
strict licensing and other obligations for trustees when offering the default option 
(MySuper), including: providing a single diversified investment strategy as a default 
option suitable for the majority of participants; avoiding unnecessary or excessive 
fees; and delivering value for money (measured by long-term net returns). A similar 
default DC plan account exists in the United States (known as the Qualified Default 
Investment Alternative), which must also be diversified.
In Europe the updated Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision (IORP II) 
will lead to regulatory changes for pension plans. Although each country will interpret 
the provisions slightly differently, the changes relate to governance, risk management, 
and disclosure. A number of key functions are defined, such as an internal audit, and 
standards are applied to those executing these key functions, including a requirement 
that such a person does not carry out a similar function for the plan sponsor. Many 
pension plans will need to document their risk management policies and procedures. 
For example, each fund must document its “own risk assessment” covering items 5
Pension Funds: External Constraints 317
such as the risk of not meeting benefit obligations and operational risk, including 
administrative error or fraud. For disclosure, there will also be greater harmonization 
of pension benefit statements with certain items required to be included.
US corporate pension plans are subject to significant regulatory oversight. The 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) regulates vesting, fund -
ing requirements, and payouts. ERISA includes a fiduciary code of conduct and 
required disclosures. ERISA established the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 
a US government agency that collects premiums from pension plan sponsors and 
pays benefits to participants (approximately 630,000) in terminated plans. Although 
ERISA protects benefits that workers have earned, an employer may still terminate a 
plan, essentially freezing a worker’s ability to earn additional benefits. Moreover, the 
US Pension Protection Act of 2006 established minimum funding standards for DB 
plans, while later revisions raised the rates corporations could use to discount their 
liabilities (high-grade bond yields averaged over 25 years). Importantly, a potential 
consequence of using higher discount rates is these DB plans must generate higher 
returns for their funding status to remain sustainable, which typically requires taking 
on greater investment risk.
Tax and Accounting Constraints
Governments around the world encourage citizens to save for retirement by typically 
providing favorable tax treatment to retirement savings. Favorable tax treatment may 
come in different forms: reduced taxes on retirement plan contributions, favorable 
tax rates on investment income and/or capital gains, and lower tax rates on benefit 
payments drawn throughout retirement (versus higher taxes on lump sum payments). 
Foregone tax revenues from such favorable tax treatment are costly, so to ensure pen -
sion plans actually reduce tax burdens for retirement savers, governments typically 
place restrictions on plan design, governance, and investment activities in order for 
plans to qualify for the favorable tax treatment.
In the United States, 401(k) plans are tax deferred as participants make pre-tax 
contributions and do not pay tax on investment earnings; benefit payments, however, 
are taxed as ordinary income. To encourage savings retention within the pension plan, 
early withdrawals before age 59½ are taxed an additional 10%. In the United Kingdom, 
private pension plans are also tax deferred, with no tax on contributions or on invest -
ment earnings. The first 25% of benefit payments are tax free, and the remaining 75% 
is taxed as ordinary income after a tax-free personal allowance. In China, companies 
providing occupational pensions (known as Enterprise Annuities) are given tax relief 
amounting to 4% of wages; however, there are taxation differences between regions.
Pension plans taxed on investment earnings must be aware of tax implications 
of their investment activities. For example, there may be favorable capital gains tax 
treatment for investments held over 1 year, which should incentivize investing in lower 
turnover strategies. Also, pension plans must consider tax implications when returns 
from investing via futures and other derivatives are treated as income and taxed at 
higher rates than returns from investing in the underlying securities, which are typi -
cally taxed at lower capital gains and dividend rates. When investing internationally, 
double taxation may occur when the same income or capital gain is taxed both by 
the jurisdiction in which it is earned and in the jurisdiction where the pension fund 
resides. To achieve tax efficiency, pension plans should invest via legal structures 
that provide access to double taxation treaties, whereby taxes paid in the country of 
residence are exempt in the country where they arise (alternatively, the plan receives 
a foreign tax credit in its country of residence to reflect taxes withheld in the country 
where the income/gain arose).
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 318
Accounting treatment is another important external factor that drives investment 
decision making by pension funds. These treatments may differ across countries, so it is 
important to be fully aware of them. Here we focus on the United States to illustrate how 
accounting treatment may influence investment choices. Corporate DB pension plans 
must follow generally accepted accounting principles—notably, Accounting Standards 
Codification (ASC) 715, Compensation—Retirement Benefits, which requires that 
an overfunded (underfunded) plan must appear as an asset (liability) on the balance 
sheet of the corporate sponsor. Such plan sponsor must also report gains, losses, and 
service costs as part of net income. This accounting treatment significantly increased 
the transparency of US plans’ funded status, and it prompted many corporate plans 
to implement liability-driven investing techniques to reduce the effect of funded ratio 
volatility on their financial statements.
Public pension plans in the US must follow Governmental Accounting Standards 
Board (GASB) rules. Under GASB rules, public plan sponsors must report fair mar -
ket values of plan assets and can use a blended approach to valuing plan liabilities. 
The latter involves discounting the funded portion of pension liabilities using the 
(higher) expected return on plan assets as well as discounting the unfunded portion 
of liabilities based on the (lower) yield on tax-exempt municipal bonds. Using a higher 
discount rate for the funded portion of liabilities skews the risk tolerance of public 
pension plans and incentivizes them to allocate relatively large proportions of assets 
to equities and alternative investments.
PENSION FUNDS: RISK CONSIDERATIONS
evaluate risk considerations of private defined benefit (DB) pension 
plans in relation to 1) plan funded status, 2) sponsor financial 
strength, 3) interactions between the sponsor’s business and the 
fund’s investments, 4) plan design, and 5) workforce characteristics
Despite the long-term trend in the shift away from DB plans toward DC plans, as 
previously demonstrated, DB plans (and their hybrids) are still a key part of the 
pension landscape in several P7 countries, such as Canada, Japan, the Netherlands, 
and Switzerland. As such, it is important to review risk management considerations 
of private defined benefit pension plans—a topic that has intensified following the 
global financial crisis of 2007-2009. Key risk considerations of such plans must be 
measured and managed.
1. Plan funded status
When a defined benefit pension plan is fully funded, the value of assets is 
greater than or equal to the present value of the liabilities. If the value of 
the assets falls below the present value of the liabilities, the pension plan is 
considered to be underfunded and the plan sponsor is left with a financial 
liability. The plan sponsor can take several approaches in order to minimize 
the risk of generating a financial liability:
a. Seek to match assets to liabilities in terms of quantity, timing, and risk 
using a Liability Driven Investing (LDI) approach. Duration gap man -
agement or cash flow–matching suits plans that are close to fully funded 
and seek to maintain that status.6
Pension Funds: Risk Considerations 319
b. Seek to grow assets at a higher rate of return than the expected growth 
in liabilities—which typically involves taking on more investment risk. 
This form of investment suits plans that are underfunded and wishing 
to return to a fully funded status. It may also suit fully funded plans that 
are seeking to lower their contribution rate over time and are willing 
to endure the increased volatility in funded status that this approach 
entails.
c. Seek to invest in more defensive assets expected to deliver less volatile 
returns. This may suit defined benefit pension plans where the plan 
sponsor is willing to make higher contributions over time in exchange 
for less variability in the plan funded status.
In cases where a plan is adequately funded, the sponsoring corporation may 
seek to remove pension-driven balance sheet volatility by engaging pension 
risk transfer through such mechanisms as:
 ●offering lump sum payments to beneficiaries in exchange for voluntarily 
leaving the plan; or
 ●negotiating a transfer of the risk to an insurance provider.
2. Sponsor financial strength
When a defined benefit pension plan sponsor is not financially strong, there 
is a considerable risk that it may fail to make the necessary contributions 
to the plan. The plan sponsor may not be able to meet its defined benefit 
pension plan liabilities if there is a funding shortfall. If the plan sponsor files 
for bankruptcy protection, an underfunded pension plan is in the same diffi -
cult position as other creditors, having to join the queue claiming the firm’s 
remaining assets.
The relative size of the plan also influences the sponsor’s ability to assume 
risk. If the pension plan is small (large) relative to the size of the sponsor, 
then volatility in pension assets, liabilities, and/or contributions will have a 
smaller (larger) effect on the sponsoring company’s balance sheet.
3. Interactions between the sponsor’s business and the fund’s investments
In the past, many private defined benefit pension plans have held signifi -
cant stakes in the equity of the sponsor company. However, due to the risk 
involved, many regulators have restricted how much a plan may invest in 
the stock of the sponsor company. This risk materializes in circumstances 
in which the company performs poorly and its share price falls, thereby 
increasing the risk that pension plan assets fall below liabilities. This may 
coincide with a point in time when the sponsor’s financial strength is 
poor, constraining its ability to make additional contributions necessary to 
address the developing funding shortfall. For this reason, it is advisable for 
the plan to diversify out of the sponsor company’s stock. It is also prudent 
to diversify away from companies operating in the same industry, because 
their risk and return are expected to be highly correlated with those of the 
sponsor company’s stock.
4. Plan design
Poor plan design can contribute many risks for the private defined bene -
fit pension plan sponsor. When setting out the formula for calculation of 
defined benefit payments, the plan sponsor must balance adequacy (will 
the benefit payment be sufficient to meet income needs in retirement) and 
sustainability (what contribution rate is sustainable, and what investment 
return can realistically be achieved) within the context of its risk tolerance. 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 320
There is a significant risk that a company will be overly optimistic in pre -
dicting its ability to make contributions to its pension plan decades into the 
future.
The plan design is informed by its purpose as an employee retention tool to 
mitigate the risk of losing employees to a competitor. The company/sponsor 
may also wish to increase future defined benefit payments to address worker 
unrest, which may otherwise lead to strike action or lengthy negotiations 
with unions. If a company does not have immediate excess cash flow, it may 
prefer to increase future defined benefit payments instead of granting imme -
diate pay raises.
5. Workforce characteristics
The nature of the workforce is an important risk consideration for com -
panies because it impacts what the duration of the assets should be. The 
younger the workforce, the longer the duration of assets and the greater risk 
tolerance the plan will have. If a company’s workforce has high turnover, 
it may have few employees whose entitlements to defined benefit pay -
ments will vest. On the other hand, if the average tenure of the workforce 
increases, then more liabilities will vest, thereby reducing the plan’s funded 
status. If the workforce is older and nearer to retirement age, an import -
ant risk consideration is keeping sufficient liquidity so the plan can meet 
liabilities when they become due. Conversely, in a plan where the work -
force is younger, on average, the sponsor may take on more liquidity risk. A 
workforce with a high level of vested benefits may constrain the company in 
terms of flexibility in managing its workforce. For example, a company may 
prefer to downsize its workforce, but doing so might require it to pay out 
excessive vested benefits.
Retired workers also influence the longevity risk of DB plans. Longevity risk 
is the risk that an individual will live longer than expected and draw more 
in benefit payments than the amount determined in the calculation of plan 
liabilities. In private DB pension plans, longevity risk is pooled such that 
if a participant dies earlier than expected, he/she leaves more assets in the 
pool that can then cover additional payments for those who live longer than 
expected. However, this pooling of longevity risk does not mitigate the effect 
of rising life expectancies, which implies, all else equal, an increase in total 
DB plan liabilities.
In setting a risk objective, plan sponsors must consider plan status, sponsor finan -
cial status and profitability, sponsor and pension fund common risk exposures, plan 
features, and workforce characteristics, as shown in Exhibit 5 .
Exhibit 5: Factors Affecting Risk Tolerance and Risk Objectives of Defined Benefit Plans
Category Variable Explanation
Plan status  ■Plan funded status (surplus or 
deficit) ■Higher pension surplus or higher funded status implies 
potentially greater risk tolerance.
Sponsor financial status 
and profitability ■Debt to total assets
 ■Current and expected profitability
 ■Size of plan compared to market 
capitalization of sponsor company ■Lower debt ratios and higher current and expected prof -
itability imply greater risk tolerance.
 ■Large sponsor company size relative to pension plan size 
implies greater risk tolerance.
Pension Funds: Risk Considerations 321
Category Variable Explanation
Sponsor and pension 
fund common risk 
exposures ■Correlation of sponsor operating 
results with pension asset returns ■The lower the correlation, the greater the risk tolerance, 
all else equal.
Plan features  ■Provision for early retirement
 ■Provision for lump-sum 
distributions ■Such options tend to reduce the duration of plan liabili -
ties, implying lower risk tolerance, all else equal.
Workforce 
characteristics ■Age of workforce
 ■Active lives relative to retired lives ■The younger the workforce and the greater the pro -
portion of active lives, the greater the duration of plan 
liabilities and the greater the risk tolerance.
EXAMPLE 2
Andes Sports Equipment Corporation—Defined Benefit 
Plan
1. Frank Smit, CFA, is chief financial officer of Andes Sports Equipment 
Company (ADSE), a leading Dutch producer of winter and water sports 
gear. ADSE is a small company based in Amsterdam, and all of its revenues 
come from Europe. Product demand has been strong in the past few years, 
although it is highly cyclical. The company has rising earnings and a strong 
(low debt) balance sheet. ADSE is a relatively young company, and as such, 
its defined benefit pension plan has no retired employees. This essentially 
active-lives plan has €100 million in assets and an €8 million surplus in rela -
tion to the projected benefit obligation (PBO). Several facts concerning the 
plan follow:
 ■The duration of the plan’s liabilities (which are all Europe-based) is 20 
years.
 ■The discount rate applied to these liabilities is 6 percent.
 ■The average age of ADSE’s workforce is 39 years.
Based on the information provided, discuss ADSE’s risk tolerance.
Solution:
ADSE appears to have above average risk tolerance for the following 
reasons:
a. The plan has a small surplus (8 percent of plan assets); that is, the plan 
is overfunded by €8 million.
b. The company’s balance sheet is strong (low use of debt).
c. The company is profitable despite operating in a cyclical industry.
d. The average age of its workforce is low.
2. Smit must set risk objectives for the ADSE pension plan. Because of excel -
lent recent investment results, ADSE has not needed to make a contribution 
to the pension fund in the two most recent years. Smit considers it very im -
portant to maintain a plan surplus in relation to PBO. Because an €8 million 
surplus will be an increasingly small buffer as plan liabilities increase, Smit 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 322
decides that maintaining plan funded status, stated as a ratio of plan assets 
to PBO at 100 percent or greater, is his top priority.
Based on the information provided, state an appropriate risk objective for 
ADSE.
Solution:
Given Smit considered it very important to maintain a plan surplus in rela -
tion to PBO, an appropriate risk objective for ADSE relates to shortfall risk 
with respect to the plan’s funded status falling below 100 percent. For ex -
ample, ADSE may want to minimize the probability that funded status falls 
below 100 percent, or it may want the probability that funded status falls 
below 100 percent to be less than or equal to 10 percent. If a plan surplus 
is maintained, ADSE may experience more years in which it does not need 
to make a contribution. Indeed, a major motivation for maintaining a plan 
surplus is to reduce the contributions ADSE needs to make in the future. 
As such, another relevant type of risk objective would be to minimize the 
present value of expected cash contributions.
PENSION FUNDS: INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES AND 
ASSET ALLOCATION
evaluate the investment policy statement of an institutional investor
evaluate the investment portfolio of a private DB plan, sovereign 
wealth fund, university endowment, and private foundation
Investment Objectives
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Defined benefit pension plans ultimately need to meet pension liabilities through a 
combination of investment returns and contributions. In practice, the investment 
objective of a DB pension plan is often to achieve a long-term rate of return on plan 
assets that exceeds the assumed rate of return used by the pension plan actuaries, 
typically the discount rate used in valuing pension liabilities. Importantly, targeting a 
long-term return based on the discount rate may be inappropriate in some cases. For 
example, when the discount rate is set using yields on government bonds, the target 
return is likely too low. In such a case, it may be preferable to fully hedge interest rate 
risk by adopting a liability-driven investing approach.
In determining an appropriate target return, it is worth noting that, ideally, the 
asset base should grow—through investment returns and contributions—in line with 
the growth of liabilities. If a plan is underfunded, the asset base must grow faster than 
liabilities. Because the growth of liabilities is met through investment returns and 
contributions (from the plan sponsor and/or employees), the DB plan’s board and 
investment committee must consider the appropriate level of portfolio risk relative to 
the plan sponsor’s willingness and ability to raise contribution rates should investment 
returns fall short of expectations.7
Pension Funds: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 323
In summary, the primary objective for DB pension plans is to achieve a long-term 
target return (usually defined in nominal terms) over a specified investment horizon 
(3–5 years or even as long as 10 or 25 years) with an appropriate level of risk that 
allows the plan to meet its contractual liabilities. The secondary objective could be 
to minimize the present value of expected cash contributions.
In setting overall investment strategy, many DB pension plans engage in detailed 
Asset Liability Management studies every 3–5 years. These studies include Monte 
Carlo simulations of thousands of scenarios for asset returns and factors driving 
pension liabilities (importantly, the discount rate) aimed at producing probability 
distributions for funded ratios and contribution rates at different horizons. These 
distributions are useful for determining key metrics, such as the expected funded 
ratio in 10 or 15 years, surplus volatility, surplus-at-risk, and volatility of contribution 
rates. Additionally, many pension funds engage in detailed liquidity modeling and 
stress testing that involve modeling contributions, benefit payments, capital calls for 
funding private equity investments, stressed asset values, and reduced liquidity of 
certain asset classes in market downturns. Besides providing an assessment of the 
appropriateness of the pension fund’s liquidity profile, such stress testing provides 
insights into meeting liquidity needs during a financial crisis.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
The main objective of defined contribution pension plans is to prudently grow assets 
that will support spending needs in retirement. Defined contribution plans usually 
offer a variety of investment options with differing investment objectives to suit par -
ticipants of different ages, asset balances, and risk appetites. The investment options 
offered by the DC plan sponsor can be managed either in-house or externally as well 
as passively or actively. Most DC pension plans also provide a default option for 
disengaged participants. Plan trustees/boards must set an appropriate investment 
objective of the default option after reviewing the characteristics of existing default 
participants. Unsurprisingly, many DC plans end up with a balanced asset allocation 
mix as the default option—frequently in the form of a life-cycle fund. In cases where 
a DC plan provides participants a balanced asset allocation option with active man -
agement, a secondary objective may be to outperform the long-term policy bench -
mark consisting of the weighted average of individual asset class benchmarks and the 
policy weights defined by the strategic asset allocation. Finally, for some DC plans it 
is important their investment options outperform those of other DC pension plans, 
which is particularly relevant in countries where participants can voluntarily switch 
between DC plan providers.
 
Sample Investment Objectives of Different Pension Plans
Public DB Pension Plan:
1. The assets of Public Plan will be invested with the objective of achiev -
ing a long-term rate of return that meets or exceeds the Public Plan 
actuarial expected rate of return.
2. Public Plan will seek to maximize returns for the level of risk taken.
3. Public Plan will also seek to achieve a return that exceeds the Policy 
Index.
4. Public Plan will seek to achieve its objectives on an after fees basis.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 324
Corporate DB Pension Plan:
The Trustee wishes to ensure that the Corporate Plan can meet its obligations 
to the beneficiaries while recognizing the cost implications to the Company of 
pursuing excessively conservative investment strategies. The objectives of the 
Plan are defined as: wishing to maximize the long-term return on investments 
subject to, in its opinion, an acceptably low likelihood of failing to achieve an 
ongoing 105% funding level.
Corporate DC Pension Plan:
The Fund currently offers a range of investment options to its participants and 
has adopted an age-based default strategy for participants who do not choose 
an investment option.
The investment strategy of the Fund is to put in place portfolios to achieve 
the objectives of its stakeholders over a reasonable period of time with a rea -
sonable probability of success.
In establishing each option’s investment objectives, the Trustee takes into 
account the average participant’s age, account balance, and risk appetite. The 
participant’s choice of investment option indicates his/her risk appetite.
For example, a participants selecting the growth option indicates a higher 
risk tolerance over a longer investment time horizon. The investment objective 
for the growth option is to build an investment portfolio to outperform inflation 
+ 4% per annum over 7-year periods while accepting a high level of risk that 
is expected to generate 4–6 negative annual returns over any 20-year period.
Asset Allocation by Pension Plans
An examination of pension fund asset allocations shows very large differences in 
average asset allocations by country. Moreover, examining pension fund asset allo -
cations within a country also typically shows large differences despite these plans 
seeking to achieve similar goals. Such inter- and intra-national differences are driven 
by many factors discussed earlier in this reading, including the differences in legal, 
regulatory, accounting, and tax constraints; the investment objectives, risk appetites, 
and investment beliefs of the stakeholders; the liabilities to and demographics of the 
ultimate beneficiaries; the availability of investment opportunities; and the expected 
cost of living in retirement.
Exhibit 6  presents the average asset allocation of pension funds in the world’s 
largest pension fund markets. The data are an aggregation of both DB and DC plans 
as presented (the split between DB and DC plans for each of the P7 countries is 
shown in Exhibit 3 ).
Note the category ‘Other’ includes hedge funds, private equity funds, loans, struc -
tured products, other mutual funds (i.e., not invested in equities, bonds, or cash), land, 
buildings, and other miscellaneous investments.
Pension Funds: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 325
Exhibit 6: Pension Asset Allocation for P7 Countries (2021)
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%AustraliaUnited StatesUnited KingdomNetherlandsCanadaJapanSwitzerland
Equities Bonds Other Cash
Source : Willis Towers Watson Thinking Ahead Institute (2021) .
The key observations regarding the data presented in Exhibit 6  are as follows:
 ■Equities : Equities provide a long-term risk premium over bonds and cash 
and are typically viewed as the asset class of choice for long-term inves -
tors, like pension plans because of the higher expected returns they offer. 
Traditionally, equities are also viewed as an inflation hedge, as opposed to 
bonds that do not perform well in an inflationary environment. However, 
over the past decade, there has been a decrease in the equity allocation in 
several countries, particularly in Japan, Canada, and Australia. In aggregate, 
the resulting reallocation has been to the category ‘Other, ’ which includes 
such alternatives as private equity and debt, real assets, and hedge funds, 
as well as to bonds (and fixed income, generally) as DB pension funds have 
reduced their risk appetite to lower the volatility of their funded ratios. 
Australia and the US have the largest proportions of DC pension assets and 
also the largest allocations to equities. Although not shown in Exhibit 6 , it 
is worth noting that the United States, Australia, and the Netherlands have 
the highest proportions of their equities allocations invested in their local 
markets. Given the size of the domestic equities markets in Australia and 
the Netherlands, this implies significant home bias.
 ■Fixed Income : Fixed income plays a defensive role in pension fund portfo -
lios, because during times of financial market stress, equity markets and 
interest rates tend to fall. Fixed-income investments also help DB pension 
plans hedge the interest rate risk relative to their pension liabilities. Many 
regulators, in fact, require DB pension plans to hold a minimum allocation 
in fixed-income investments. Over the last decade, US corporate pension 
plans have increased their allocations to fixed-income investments, despite 
low expected returns, driven by the desire to reduce their funded ratio vola -
tility. Conversely, US public pension plans have reduced their fixed-income 
allocations overall while increasing their allocations in the fixed-income 
space to high yield (riskier) bonds. The reallocation and repositioning are 
driven by the large gap that has opened between their expected rate of 
return and the yield available on long-term government securities.
 ■Alternatives (Other) : This category includes private equity and debt markets, 
real estate, hedge funds, and real assets. As a group, these alternative assets 
tend to have low, or negative, correlations with traditional investments as 
well as lower drawdowns. In the case of hedge funds, this may be explained 
by the lower volatility of these strategies versus equity markets. Private asset 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 326
classes have historically also exhibited lower drawdowns compared to equi -
ties. This may be partially explained by a lack of fully marking-to-market 
because of limited market transactions as well as appraisal-based valuations 
that lag changes in market pricing. Overall, the perception of institutional 
investors is that alternatives can produce equity-like returns over the long 
run with relatively low drawdowns, which has been the motivation for the 
shift from equities to alternatives over the past decade and a half. However, 
given the complexity and skill required to manage alternative investments, 
these investments come with high fees; thus, fee-sensitive institutions with 
significant liquidity needs may be unable to make sizable allocations to 
alternatives. Furthermore, attractive investment opportunities in private 
markets and in hedge fund strategies may be scarce. Increased competition 
and the huge amounts of capital deployed on a global scale by institutional 
investors may put downward pressure on future returns. Although still 
a smaller part of most institutional portfolios, allocations to real assets 
have increased significantly because they are considered an attractive way 
to hedge inflation. Japan has been slowest among the select countries to 
increase allocations to alternatives; however, the transition is underway 
with the country’s largest pension plan, Government Pension Investment 
Fund (GPIF), which is reducing its allocation to domestic bonds in favor of 
alternatives.
EXAMPLE 3
Asset Allocation by a Public Defined Benefit Plan
1. Susan Liew, CFA, is the chief investment officer of the Lorenza State Pen -
sion Plan (LSPP), a public DB plan. The plan maintains an asset allocation of 
30% US equities, 30% international equities, 30% US fixed income, and 10% 
international fixed income. Liew’s investment team developed the follow -
ing long-term expected real returns for the asset classes in which the LSPP 
has traditionally invested. The outlook for US and international equities is 
slightly below long-term averages, while the outlook for US and internation -
al fixed income is well below long-term averages.
 
Asset ClassExpected Long-Term (10-Y ear) 
Annual Return
US equities 4.0%
International equities 5.0%
US fixed income 1.0%
International fixed income −0.5%
 
Given the poor prospects for fixed income and the mediocre expectations 
for equities, Liew is exploring making allocations to various alternatives and 
has asked LSPP’s asset consultant to provide comments on considerations 
for each alternative asset class, as shown here:
Pension Funds: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 327
 
Asset Class Comments
Alternative 
debtRepresents a diverse range of high yielding and floating-rate 
debt expected to return 300 bps annually over traditional fixed 
income (default-adjusted basis). The additional returns are 
compensation for increased liquidity risk in private debt, added 
credit risk in high yield and EM debt, and non-performing 
loans.
Infrastructure 
fundsStrong income-like characteristics given contracted cash flows 
for most underlying infrastructure projects. This asset class 
entails increased liquidity risk but offers some inflation protec -
tion (many contracted cash flows are linked to inflation).
Hedge funds Provide access to various diversifying strategies, including 
those with potential to generate gains in both rising and falling 
markets. Expected to return 250 bps annually over traditional 
long-only equities. Careful manager selection and underlying 
strategy selection (especially exposure to equity market beta) are 
important factors.
 
Liew recommends to LSPP’s Board of Trustees the following change in asset 
allocation:
 
Asset ClassCurrent Asset 
AllocationRecommended Asset 
Allocation
US equities 30% 25%
International equities 30% 25%
US fixed income 30% 15%
International fixed income 10% 5%
Alternative debt — 10%
Infrastructure funds — 10%
Hedge funds — 10%
 
How would the recommended change in asset allocation be expected to 
affect LSPP’s funded status?
Solution:
The recommended changes in asset allocation would likely affect LSPP’s 
funded status as follows:
 ■The changes would increase expected returns, implying higher 
expected asset values for LSPP over time.
 ■Given that both alternative debt and hedge funds have higher pro -
jected long-term returns than traditional debt and equities, respec -
tively, the discount rate applied to LSPP’s liabilities can be increased, 
thereby reducing their present value.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 328
 ■On balance, LSPP’s funded status would be expected to improve 
because of the recommended changes in asset allocation. In addition 
to generating higher asset values and lower present value of liabilities, 
the volatility of assets (and therefore the risk to funded status) should 
be reduced because of the lower correlation among asset returns.
Note that although these alternative investments entail reduced liquidity, 
this does not impact funded status; in fact, funded status improves because 
of the factors mentioned previously. However, the reduced liquidity must be 
considered to ensure sufficient coverage of prospective liabilities. Alterna -
tive investments entail greater manager selection risk and larger dispersion 
of returns around the policy benchmark relative to a passive allocation to 
public markets. Careful manager selection would likely require resources 
that would increase internal costs, and also require paying higher fees to 
access skilled alternative asset managers.
Exhibit 7  shows the evolution of pension fund asset allocation trends from 2000 
–2020 for the P7 countries. It is apparent that the allocation to equities has decreased 
from about 60% in 2000 to about 43% in 2020, while allocations to the ‘Other’ category 
of alternatives has increased from about 7% to 26% over the same time period. This is 
consistent with the general trend among institutional investors of diversifying out of 
equities and into alternative investments, including private equity, natural resources, 
real estate, and hedge funds.
Exhibit 7: Evolution of Pension Asset Allocation from 2000 to 2020
Equitie s Bonds Other Cash100
6080
40
20
10
97 17e 02 07 12
Source : Willis Towers Watson Thinking Ahead Institute (2021) .
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Types and Stakeholders 329
SOVEREIGN WEALTH FUNDS: TYPES AND 
STAKEHOLDERS
discuss the stakeholders in the portfolio, the liabilities, the 
investment time horizons, and the liquidity needs of different types 
of institutional investors
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) are state-owned investment funds or entities that 
invest in financial or real assets. Sovereign wealth funds have increased significantly 
in number and size over the past two decades. Governments have established SWFs 
from budget surpluses to meet different objectives. The International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) has defined five broad types of sovereign wealth funds, and each pursues dif -
ferent investment objectives. Exhibit 8  summarizes these five types with their main 
objective and some notable examples.
Exhibit 8: Major Types of Sovereign Wealth Funds
Type Objective Examples
Budget stabilization 
fundsSet up to insulate the budget 
and economy from com -
modity price volatility and 
external shocks.Economic and Social Stabilization 
Fund of Chile; Timor-Leste 
Petroleum Fund; Russia’s Oil 
Stabilization Fund
Development funds Established to allocate 
resources to priority socio -
economic projects, usually 
infrastructure.Mubadala (UAE); Iran’s National 
Development Fund; Ireland 
Strategic Investment Fund; Temasek 
(Singapore)
Savings funds Intended to share wealth 
across generations by 
transforming non-renewable 
assets into diversified finan -
cial assets.Abu Dhabi Investment Authority; 
Kuwait Investment Authority; Qatar 
Investment Authority; Russia’s 
National Wealth Fund
Reserve funds Intended to reduce the neg -
ative carry costs of holding 
reserves or to earn higher 
return on ample reserves.China Investment Corporation; 
Korea Investment Corporation; GIC 
Private Ltd. (Singapore)
Pension reserve 
fundsSet up to meet identi -
fied future outflows with 
respect to pension-related 
contingent-type liabilities on 
governments’ balance sheets.National Social Security 
Fund (China); New Zealand 
Superannuation Fund; Future Fund of 
Australia
Source:  International Monetary Fund, “Sovereign Wealth Funds—A Work Agenda” (29 February 2008).
Exhibit 9  shows some of the largest sovereign wealth funds, which manage a total of 
about US$3.6 trillion in assets—close to 50% of all SWF assets (more than US$7.3 
trillion).8
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 330
Exhibit 9: Select Large Sovereign Wealth Funds
FundInception 
Date Country Type
Kuwait Investment 
Authority1953 Kuwait Savings Fund
Abu Dhabi Investment 
Authority1976 Abu Dhabi, United 
Arab EmiratesSavings Fund
Norway’s Government 
Pension Fund—Global1990 Norway Budget Stabilization/ 
Savings/Pension 
Reserve
China Investment 
Corporation2007 China Reserve Fund
Source:  SWF Institute ( www  .swfinstitute  .org).
Stakeholders
SWF stakeholders include the citizens, the government, and external asset managers 
as well as the SWF management, investment committees, and boards.
The ultimate SWF stakeholders are the current and future citizens (or residents) 
of the country. Depending on the objectives of the SWF, these stakeholders either 
benefit directly in the form of payments (e.g., for pension reserve funds) or indirectly 
through stabilization of government budgets, lower taxes, or investments by the SWF 
in the domestic economy. If the SWF fails to meet its objectives, citizens/residents 
might be impacted through higher future taxes. Several SWFs are explicitly set up 
to benefit not only the current generation but also future generations. When such 
intergenerational wealth transfer is part of the objective, significant transparency and 
communication are required by the SWF and government to gain support from all 
stakeholders. This also requires long-term thinking by the government, which can be 
challenging when some governments have tenures of only a few years and when fiscal 
budgets vary significantly over the economic cycle.
The management or investment office of an SWF is tasked with investing its 
assets according to the investment policy and objectives of the fund. They monitor 
assets, make recommendations on investment strategy, and either select external 
asset managers or manage assets in-house. Appointment to an SWF’s board, which 
oversees the management or investment office, is typically executed through a formal 
process that may include appointment by the current ruling government. In any case, 
the board has a fiduciary duty to the ultimate beneficiaries, the nation’s current and 
future generations.
SOVEREIGN WEALTH FUNDS: OTHER 
CONSIDERATIONS
Liabilities and Investment Horizons
There is a wide variety in investment objectives, liabilities, investment horizons, and 
liquidity needs among the five types of SWFs, so we will discuss each type sepa -
rately. As a group, however, SWFs are different from the other institutional investors 9
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Other Considerations 331
covered in this reading when it comes to liabilities. The liabilities of DB pension funds, 
endowments and foundations, insurance companies, and banks are clearly defined, 
which facilitates asset/liability management (ALM) processes. SWFs, however, do not 
generally have clearly defined liabilities given their mission of intergenerational wealth 
transfer. It is also worth noting that SWFs do not necessarily fit neatly into one of 
the five different types discussed in this section. For example, Norway’s Government 
Pension Fund Global (formerly known as Norway’s Petroleum Fund) undertakes ele -
ments of stabilization and sterilization, accumulating pension reserves, and saving 
for future generations.
Budget Stabilization Funds
Budget stabilization funds are established to insulate the fiscal budget from com -
modity price volatility and other external shocks, particularly if a nation’s revenue 
is tied to natural resource production or other cyclical industries. These funds have 
uncertain liabilities and relatively short investment horizons. Their main purpose is 
risk management because such funds may be needed on a short-term basis to help 
support the government budget. The investment objective is usually to deliver returns 
in excess of inflation with a low probability of a negative return in any year. Budget 
stabilization funds typically avoid assets that are highly correlated with the main 
sources of government revenue, and they may engage in hedging against declines in 
prices of commodities that are important revenue generators for the local economy. 
These funds mainly invest in government bonds and other debt securities. Examples 
of budget stabilization funds include the Economic and Social Stabilization Fund of 
Chile and Russia’s Oil Stabilization Fund.
Development Funds
Development funds are established to support a nation’s economic development 
through investing in essential infrastructure, innovation, or by supporting key indus -
tries. Liabilities are not clearly defined and typically uncertain for development funds, 
but their overall objective is to raise a country’s economic growth or to diversify the 
economy. As such, these funds have an implicit real return target: to increase real 
domestic GDP growth and productivity. Some initiatives, such as infrastructure/
industrial development, may be ongoing and long-term, while others may have a fixed, 
medium-term horizon, such as a medical research fund. Examples of development 
funds include Mubadala Development Corp. (UAE) and the National Development 
Fund of Iran.
Savings Funds
Savings funds are typically established to transform proceeds from the sale of 
non-renewable natural resources into long-term wealth and a diversified portfolio of 
financial assets. The mission of a savings fund is wealth transfer to future generations 
after the sources of natural wealth have been depleted. As such, their liabilities are 
long-term. Some savings funds have a real return objective or an explicit spending 
policy (like endowments). Norway’s Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) uses 
a fiscal spending rule whereby it intends to withdraw 3% of the fund’s value annually 
with the goal of gradually phasing oil revenue into the Norwegian economy. This 
spending rate is linked to the expected real return earned by the GPFG. A special 
case of savings funds involves government investment holding companies, which 
are funded from the privatization proceeds of national companies (e.g., Singapore’s 
Temasek Holdings). Because of their long-term horizons, savings funds invest in risky 
and illiquid assets, including equities and a wide range of alternative investments. 
Of course, savings funds should avoid investing in assets highly correlated with the 
non-renewable resources from which the government is trying to diversify.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 332
Reserve Funds
Reserve investment funds are established from central bank excess foreign currency 
reserves. The objective is to achieve a return higher than that on FX reserves (usually 
invested in low-duration, high-grade debt instruments) and to reduce the negative 
cost-of-carry of holding FX reserves. Reserve funds are common in export-intensive 
economies that have built up large FX reserves. Central banks accumulate such reserves 
as they print local currency to buy FX (like US dollars or euros) from local firms selling 
export goods. The central banks then issue monetary stabilization bonds to absorb the 
excess local currency. So, the central banks typically end up with FX reserves invested 
in low-yielding US Treasury or other high-quality sovereign debt instruments, while 
their liabilities (monetary stabilization bonds) pay much higher yields that create 
the negative cost-of-carry. Countries mitigate this cost by creating sovereign wealth 
reserve funds, placing excess FX reserves in these funds, and investing them globally 
in higher yielding, risky assets. Although their true liabilities are the central bank’s 
monetary stabilization bonds, in practice, reserve funds operate somewhat similarly 
to endowments and foundations by having either a nominal or real return target. Also, 
their investment horizons are very long, with typically no immediate or interim pay -
out expectation. Consequently, reserve funds generally invest in diversified portfolios 
with significant exposure to equities and other high-yielding alternative investments. 
Examples of reserve funds include China Investment Corporation (CIC), Korea 
Investment Corporation (KIC), and GIC Private Limited (GIC), formerly known as 
Government of Singapore Investment Corporation.
Pension Reserve Funds
Pension reserve funds are established to help prefund contingent pension-related 
liabilities on the government’s balance sheet. Pension reserve funds are usually funded 
from fiscal surpluses during economic booms. The goal is to help reduce the burden 
on future taxpayers by prefunding social security and health care costs arising from 
aging populations, so these funds generally have long-term investment horizons. 
There is usually an accumulation phase  (decumulation phase ) where the govern -
ment predominantly contributes to (withdraws from) the fund. However, additional 
uncertainty also exists around expected cash flows, particularly in the case of funding 
health care because those costs are quite volatile. The investment objective of pension 
reserve funds is to earn returns sufficient to maximize the likelihood of meeting future 
pension, social security, and/or health care costs as they arise. Therefore, such funds 
will typically invest in a diversified portfolio with the majority in such equities and 
alternative investments as property, infrastructure, hedge funds, and private markets. 
An example of a pension reserve fund is Future Fund of Australia (FFA). Its goal is to 
meet unfunded pension liabilities (retirement payments or superannuation payments 
in Australia) that will be owed to former public employees starting in 2020. FFA was 
funded from budget surpluses and privatization proceeds of Telstra, an Australian tele -
communications company that was formerly a state-owned enterprise. The investment 
mandate for FFA is to achieve an average annual return of at least the Consumer Price 
Index (CPI) + 4% to 5% per year over the long term with an acceptable level of risk.
Liquidity Needs
Budget Stabilization Funds
Stabilization funds must maintain a high level of liquidity and invest in assets that 
have a low risk of significant losses over short time periods. For example, in the event 
of a negative commodity price shock, the government might experience a significant 
budget deficit caused by lower commodity-based revenues. To stabilize the budget 
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Other Considerations 333
and meet spending needs, the stabilization fund’s assets must be readily accessible. 
As a result, budget stabilization funds invest a significant portion of their portfolios 
in cash and high-grade, fixed-income instruments that are very liquid and carry little 
risk of significant drawdown.
Development Funds
A development fund supports national economic development. Liquidity needs depend 
on the particular strategic economic development initiatives the fund was created to 
support. For example, infrastructure investments are very long-term, so funds estab -
lished to develop infrastructure would have low liquidity needs. Development funds 
designed to promote research and innovation may also require long time periods to 
see the fruits of investments in innovation and research and are likely to have low 
liquidity needs as well.
Savings Funds
Savings funds have a very long-term investment horizon and low liquidity needs. 
Their main objective is to grow wealth for future generations, so their liquidity needs, 
being long-term in nature, are comparable to those of endowments and foundations. 
In instances where the savings fund was established to transform the proceeds from 
the sale of non-renewable commodities into long-term wealth, the fund’s liquidity 
needs may change once the nation’s natural resources have been depleted because 
the government is more likely to begin withdrawing money from the fund to support 
its budgetary needs.
Reserve Funds
Reserve funds operate to offset negative carry effects of holding FX reserves, and 
consequently, excess reserves are invested in higher growth investments. The liquidity 
needs of reserve funds are lower than those of stabilization funds but higher than those 
of savings funds. Reserve funds typically hold 50%–70% in equity or equity-equivalent 
investments to achieve their return targets. The remainder, however, is likely to be 
invested in liquid fixed-income securities that could be readily sold should a dramatic 
change in the balance of trade require additional central bank reserves.
Pension Reserve Funds
Pension reserve funds need to meet future pension or health care liabilities when they 
come due. Depending on when significant fund withdrawals are expected, liquidity 
needs change over time. During the accumulation phase, reserve funds can hold a 
significant part of their portfolios in equities and relatively illiquid investments. Once 
the decumulation phase begins, the asset allocation will gradually shift toward more 
liquid, high-quality, fixed-income investments.
External Constraints Affecting Investment
In this section and the next, we briefly highlight some legal/regulatory and tax con -
straints, respectively, that sovereign wealth funds must consider when investing.
Legal and Regulatory Constraints
Sovereign wealth funds are typically established by national legislation that contains 
details on: the fund’s mission; contributions to the fund; circumstances allowing 
withdrawals from the fund; and governance structure, including selection of board 
members, their roles, and the level of board independence. Some SWFs are set up with 
clear rules on asset allocation. For example, a technology development fund may be 
required to be 100% invested in offshore technology assets to provide diversification 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 334
(versus local economic drivers) and eventual technology transfer. Alternatively, an 
industrial development fund may be required to invest 100% locally to support the 
development of key industries in the domestic economy. In any case, SWFs should 
operate in a transparent and accountable manner as they are ultimately established 
for the benefit of a nation’s people and future generations. Sound governance, inde -
pendence, transparency, and accountability are all essential to ensure that SWFs are 
protected from political influence.
The International Forum of SWFs (IFSWF) is a self-governing body established 
to promote best practices among SWFs. All IFSWF members have endorsed a set 
of generally accepted principles and practices (GAPP). Known as the “Santiago 
Principles” for the city where they were drafted, the GAPP provide a best practices 
framework by which SWFs should operate that addresses such key elements as sound 
legal framework, well-defined mission, independence, accountability, transparency, 
disclosure, ethics and professionalism, effective risk management, and regular review 
for compliance with the Santiago Principles.
Tax and Accounting Constraints
Typically, sovereign wealth funds are given tax-free status by the legislation that gov -
erns them. However, SWFs may be ineligible to claim withholding taxes or tax credits 
that are ordinarily available to taxable investors. As SWFs invest in offshore markets, 
they also need to consider any tax treaties that may exist between the countries in 
which they are investing and their own country. Some regulators allow SWFs to be 
exempt from domestic tax rules that have been put in place to deter tax avoidance by 
corporations and individuals. To prevent any international diplomatic issues, SWFs 
should be sensitive to ensuring they are not perceived as trying to avoid paying taxes 
in any offshore jurisdictions where they operate or invest.
SOVEREIGN WEALTH FUNDS: INVESTMENT 
OBJECTIVES AND ASSET ALLOCATION
evaluate the investment policy statement of an institutional investor
evaluate the investment portfolio of a private DB plan, sovereign 
wealth fund, university endowment, and private foundation
Investment Objectives
Budget Stabilization Funds
The investment objective of budget stabilization funds is capital preservation. This 
is achieved by endeavoring to deliver returns in excess of inflation with a low prob -
ability of a negative return in any given year. In addition, budget stabilization funds 
should avoid cyclical assets whose returns are highly correlated to the main sources 
of government revenue (such as natural resources industries). According to the stated 
investment objectives of Chile’s Economic and Social Stabilization Fund, “the main 
aim of its investment policy is to maximize the fund’s accumulated value in order to 
partially cover cyclical reductions in fiscal revenues while maintaining a low level of 10
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 335
risk. Its risk aversion is reflected by the choice of an investment portfolio with a high 
level of liquidity and low credit risk and volatility, thereby ensuring the availability of 
the resources to cover fiscal deficits and preventing significant losses in the fund’s value. ”
Development Funds
Development funds are established to support a nation’s economic development with 
the ultimate goal of raising a country’s long-term economic growth. The implicit invest -
ment objective of development funds is therefore to achieve a real rate of return in 
excess of real domestic GDP or productivity growth.Accordingly, Khazanah Nasional 
Berhard, the strategic investment fund of the government of Malaysia, “strives to create 
sustainable value and cultivate a high-performance culture that helps contribute to 
Malaysia’s economic competitiveness. Utilizing a proactive investment approach, we 
aim to build true value through management of our core investments, leveraging on 
our global footprint for new growth, as well as undertaking catalytic investments that 
strategically boost the country’s economy. We also actively develop human, social and 
knowledge capital for the country. ”
Savings Funds
The mission of savings funds is to ensure wealth transfer to future generations. 
Therefore, their primary objective is to maintain purchasing power of the assets 
in perpetuity while achieving investment returns sufficient to sustain the spending 
necessary to support ongoing governmental activities. According to Alaska Statutes 
37.13.020, the Alaska Permanent Fund, “should provide a means of conserving a portion 
of the state’s revenue from mineral resources to benefit all generations of Alaskans; the 
fund’s goal should be to maintain safety of principal while maximizing total return; 
the fund should be used as a savings device managed to allow the maximum use of 
disposable income from the fund for purposes designated by law. ”
Reserve Funds
The investment objective of reserve funds is usually to achieve a rate of return above the 
return the government must pay on its monetary stabilization bonds, thereby eliminat -
ing the negative cost-of-carry of holding excess FX reserves (that are typically invested 
in low duration, high-grade, fixed-income instruments). For example, Singapore’s 
Government Investment Corporation (GIC) has a clearly defined purpose: “We aim 
to achieve good long-term returns for the Government—a reasonable risk-adjusted rate 
above global inflation over a 20-year investment horizon. By achieving these returns, we 
meet our responsibility to preserve and enhance the international purchasing power of 
Singapore’s foreign reserves. The reserves provide a stream of income that can be spent 
or invested for the benefit of present and future generations. ”
Pension Reserve Funds
The investment objective of pension reserve funds is to earn sufficient returns to max -
imize the likelihood of being able to meet future unfunded pension, social security, 
and/or health care liabilities of plan participants as they arise. Accordingly, among its 
mandates, the Australian government states that its Future Fund should “maximise 
the return earned on the Fund over the long term; ... adopt an average return of at least 
the Consumer Price Index (CPI) +4 to +5 per cent per annum over the long term as the 
benchmark return on the Fund; [and] in targeting the benchmark return, the Board 
must determine an acceptable but not excessive level of risk for the Fund.... ”
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 336
EXAMPLE 4
The People’s Fund of Wigitania—A Pension Reserve Fund
The People’s Fund is a pension reserve fund established by the government of 
Wigitania by setting aside current government surpluses. Its objective is to meet 
future unfunded social security payments caused by an aging population. The 
following is an extract from the People’s Fund IPS.
Effective from 2030, the government will have the ability to withdraw assets 
to meet pension and social security liabilities falling due each year. Actuarial 
projections estimate annual payouts to be about 5% of the total fund value at 
that time. Given this level of cash flow, the Fund is expected to maintain most 
of its asset base for the foreseeable future. As such, 2030 does not represent an 
‘end date’ for measurement purposes. A long-term investment horizon remains 
appropriate at present. However, the appropriate timeframe, risk tolerance, 
portfolio construction and liquidity profile may change.
1. What are the liquidity needs of the People’s Fund?
Solution:
From the extract, we see that the unfunded pension and social security lia -
bilities that the Fund is meant to cover are expected to be about 5% of total 
fund value per year, starting in 2030. Management of the fund will need to 
ensure that they have sufficient liquidity at that time to meet those ongoing 
liabilities. Until that time, liquidity needs are very low, which should allow 
the People’s Fund to invest a significant part of its portfolio in less-liquid 
alternative asset classes.
2. What factors does the Board need to consider when reviewing the Fund’s 
investment horizon?
Solution:
The Board should consider two separate phases when reviewing the Fund’s 
investment horizon and investment policy: an accumulation phase and a 
decumulation phase. The accumulation phase lasts until 2030 and allows the 
Fund to invest with little to no liquidity needs and little concern for interim 
volatility. The decumulation phase starts after 2030, when the government 
expects to withdraw about 5% of the assets on an annual basis. The invest -
ment horizon, liquidity needs, and risk tolerance will need to be modified 
during the decumulation phase, which will affect the investment policy.
Asset Allocation by Sovereign Wealth Funds
Each of the five types of sovereign wealth funds have very different objectives and 
purposes. Not surprisingly then, these funds have very different asset allocations. 
Development funds usually have little flexibility with their asset allocations as they 
operate within a limited investment universe as part of their mandate (e.g., they are 
required to invest in local infrastructure development projects). Given that national 
development projects can be different in nature and purpose between countries, 
it would be difficult to envision a ‘typical’ asset allocation for a development fund. 
The other four types of sovereign wealth funds are more homogeneous within their 
respective groups, for which Exhibit 10  provides illustrative asset allocations.
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 337
Exhibit 10: Illustrative Asset Allocations for Different Types of Sovereign 
Wealth Funds
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%Budget Stabilization Fund—Economic and
Social Stabilization Fund of ChileSavings Fund—Abu Dhabi
Investment AuthorityReserve Investment Funds—Government of
Singapore Investment CorporationPension Reserve Funds—New Zealand
Superannuation Fund
Equities Bonds Other Cash
Sources : 1. Economic and Social Stabilization Fund of Chile website; 2. Abu Dhabi Investment 
Authority (ADIA), 2020 Review ; 3. Government Investment Corporation (GIC), Report on the 
Management of the Government’s Portfolio for the Year 2020/21 ; 4. NZSUPERFUND, New Zealand 
Superannuation Fund Annual Report2021 .
Several key points stand out from the data in Exhibit 10 :
 ■The portfolios of budget stabilization funds are dominated by fixed-income 
investments because of their defensive nature, relatively stable investment 
returns, and diversification against cyclically sensitive factors (such as com -
modity prices) that drive government budget revenues in some countries. 
The conservative asset allocation may be partly explained by the fact that 
several major stabilization funds are managed by their countries’ central 
bank or Ministry of Finance; these entities tend to be relatively risk averse.
 ■The portfolios of savings funds are shown to be tilted toward growth assets, 
equities, and alternatives (the “Other” category). Due to their very long 
investment horizons, these funds can take on more equity-related risks, and 
they consequently hold relatively high allocations to such alternative invest -
ments as real assets, private equity and debt (loans), and hedge funds.
 ■Reserve investment funds have a similar allocation to savings funds but 
they tend to allocate less to alternatives. This may be partially explained by 
reserve funds having potentially higher liquidity needs compared to sav -
ings funds because of central bank activities. Public equities are typically 
the most liquid growth asset available and help counter the negative carry 
generated by foreign exchange reserves, while bonds and other fixed-income 
investments help to reduce reserve funds’ portfolio volatility.
 ■The portfolios of pension reserve funds are relatively heavily tilted toward 
equities with a significant allocation to alternative assets, such as real assets 
and infrastructure, private equity and debt markets, and hedge funds. 
Pension reserve funds generally have long-term investment horizons (but 
not necessarily inter-generational as with savings funds) and low liquidity 
needs during their accumulation phases, which can explain their high allo -
cation to alternatives compared with other SWFs.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 338
Sovereign wealth funds with savings or pension reserve objectives typically follow 
the endowment investment model. Some also adopt the Canada reference portfolio 
model. An example of the latter is the New Zealand Superannuation Fund (NZSF). 
As noted previously, this model makes use of a reference portfolio comprising passive 
investment in stocks and bonds that are expected to meet the fund’s investment objec -
tives. The total portfolio is then invested to replicate the risk factors of the reference 
portfolio, while individual investments are benchmarked against a combined stock 
and bond benchmark representing the risk factors driving the individual investments. 
Both models result in higher allocations to alternative investments, as observed in 
Exhibit 10 .
In the Asia Pacific region, sovereign wealth funds are the largest institutional inves -
tors. Some examples include China Investment Corporation (CIC), State Administration 
of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) Investment Company (China), Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority Investment Portfolio (HKMAIP) and Government Investment Corporation 
of Singapore (GIC). Given the huge size of their assets, these SWFs tend to dominate 
the regional investment landscape. They typically have fewer investment constraints 
than other Asia Pacific institutional investors. These SWFs also have broader invest -
ment mandates, minimal investment management fee constraints, and longer time 
horizons as compared to (for example) pension funds. Such flexibility allows these 
SWFs to implement higher allocations to alternative assets.
UNIVERSITY ENDOWMENTS AND PRIVATE 
FOUNDATIONS
describe the focus of legal, regulatory, and tax constraints affecting 
different types of institutional investors
This section introduces university endowments and private foundations. As will be 
seen shortly, these two types of institutional investors have some similarities but also 
important differences that affect their investing activities.
University Endowments
Many institutions have endowments, including universities, churches, museums, and 
hospitals. These endowments are typically funded through gifts and donations and are 
intended to help the institutions provide for some of their main services. Endowment 
funds invest in capital markets to provide a savings and growth mechanism that allows 
the institution to meet its mission in perpetuity. The main objective is to provide 
intergenerational equity. As James Tobin wrote in 1974: “The trustees of an endowed 
institution are the guardians of the future against the claims of the present. Their task 
is to preserve equity among generations. ”
Throughout this reading, for simplicity we will focus on university endowments. 
The investment objectives and philosophies of the endowments of other institutions 
are typically not very different from those of university endowments. Exhibit 11  shows 
some large (by assets) university endowments.11
University Endowments and Private Foundations 339
Exhibit 11: Select US University Endowments
University Assets (US$ bn)
Harvard University 40.5
University of Texas System 31.9
Yale University 31.2
Stanford University 28.9
Princeton University 26.6
Source:  TIAA and the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO), 
2020 NACUBO–TIAA Study of Endowments (NCSE) .
Private Foundations
Foundations are nonprofit organizations that typically make grants to outside orga -
nizations and persons who carry out social, educational and other charitable activi -
ties. Many foundations are located in the United States, but some large foundations 
are outside the United States, such as the Wellcome Trust in the United Kingdom. 
Foundations are more common in the United States because of favorable tax treatment. 
Outside the United States, charitable giving is typically undertaken by family offices.
There are four different types of foundations:
1. Community foundations : These are charitable organizations that make social 
or educational grants for the benefit of a local community (e.g., the New 
York Community Trust). These foundations are usually funded by public 
donations.
2. Operating foundations : Organizations that exist to operate a not-for-profit 
business for charitable purposes. They are typically funded by individual 
donors or donor families.
3. Corporate foundations : These are established by businesses and funded from 
profits.
4. Private grant-making foundations : These are established by individual 
donors or donor families to support specific types of charities. Most of the 
largest foundations in the US fall into this category.
Community foundations are a type of public charity associated with such com -
munity organizations as hospitals, schools, and churches. They are funded by many 
relatively small donors, and they typically provide charitable support in the region 
or community where they are located. Private operating foundations are established 
to provide funding and support for related programs and activities (e.g., operating a 
museum) rather than giving grants to outside organizations or activities.
Private grant-making foundations (also called private non-operating foundations) 
are by far the largest group (in number of foundations and in total assets), so they 
are our primary focus. Private grant-making foundations support different types of 
charities and usually run a large grant-making operation in addition to an investment 
office. The main objective of most private grant-making foundations is to maintain 
purchasing power into perpetuity, so that the organization can continue making grants. 
In recent years, however, there has been a trend toward limited-life foundations as 
original donors seek to maintain control over foundation spending during their lives.
The focus of grants varies widely and includes issues such as health, education, 
environment, arts, and culture. Some foundations make large and targeted grants to 
very specific causes while others make many smaller grants to a wide variety of causes. 
Exhibit 12  shows some large US foundations and their missions.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 340
Exhibit 12: Select US Foundations
Foundation Mission
Bill & Melinda Gates 
FoundationFocus on global health and poverty. In US focus on 
education.
Ford Foundation Focus on inequality.
Robert Wood Johnson 
FoundationImprove health and health care of all Americans.
Lilly Endowment Inc. Support religion, education, community development.
William and Flora Hewlett 
FoundationHelp people build measurably better lives by focusing on 
education, the environment, global development, performing 
arts, philanthropy, and population. Also supports disadvan -
taged communities in San Francisco.
Source:  Foundation Center ( www  .foundationcenter  .org).
External Constraints Affecting Investment
In this section and the next we briefly touch on some legal/regulatory and tax con -
straints, respectively, that affect investing by university endowments and private 
foundations.
Legal and Regulatory Constraints
Charitable organizations, including endowments and foundations, are typically sub -
ject to rules and regulations in their country of domicile that: 1) require investment 
committees/officers/boards to invest on a total return basis and consider portfolio 
diversification when managing assets (i.e., follow the principles of modern portfolio 
theory, MPT); and 2) require investment committees/officers/boards to exercise a 
duty of care and prudence in overseeing the assets and making investment decisions 
(i.e., fiduciary duty).
In the United States, endowments and foundations are governed by the Uniform 
Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act of 2006 (UPMIFA). Two important 
features of UPMIFA include:
1. Allowing charitable organizations flexibility in spending decisions, 
which could be adjusted for fluctuations in the market value of assets. 
Endowments, particularly, could meet the fiduciary standard of prudence by 
maintaining purchasing power of the fund.
2. Modernizing the standard of prudence for the management of charita -
ble funds by adopting the principles of MPT established by the Uniform 
Prudent Investor Act (1994).
UK endowments and foundations are typically organized as trusts. Until 2000, UK 
trusts were limited to spending only income earned from investments (not capital 
gains). The Trustee Act (2000) changed that and, like UPMIFA in the United States, 
required trustees to manage trust assets based on MPT principles. The act also imposed 
a duty of care upon trustees. The shift toward managing portfolios using MPT prin -
ciples has enabled endowments and foundations to embrace a broader range of asset 
classes compared to the traditional 60/40 equity/bond mix. It has also allowed them 
to focus on total return rather than solely on income return (high coupon bond and/
or high-dividend-yield stocks).
University Endowments: Other Considerations 341
Tax and Accounting Constraints
Endowments and foundations typically enjoy tax-exempt status. Tax-exempt status 
has three elements:
1. Taxation of gifts and donations to endowments and foundations : Gifts and 
donations to endowments and foundations are usually tax-deductible (up 
to a certain percentage of adjusted gross income) for the person or entity 
making the gift or donation.
2. Taxation of income and capital gains on assets : Income and capital gains on 
assets are usually tax-exempt in countries that have endowments and chari -
table organizations, which are tied to such non-profit, tax-exempt organiza -
tions as universities, religious organizations, or museums.
3. Taxation on payouts from endowments and foundations : Payouts are tax 
exempt if the receiving institution is exempt from income tax. If payouts 
are made to support the operating budget of a for-profit business, then that 
business is required to treat the payout as taxable income.
In the United States, private grant-making foundations enjoy the same tax-exempt 
status as endowments. But unlike endowments, such private foundations are sub -
ject to minimum payout (spending) requirements, whereby they must distribute a 
minimum of 5% of their asset value on an annual basis in grants that support their 
mission. Failing to meet this spending requirement subjects such foundations to 
30% tax on undistributed income. Most tax-exempt private foundations also have an 
excise tax of 2% on their net investment income. In the United Kingdom, charitable 
organizations do not pay taxes on most of their income and gains if these are used 
for charitable purposes; however, taxes must be paid on funds that are not used for 
charitable purposes.
UNIVERSITY ENDOWMENTS: OTHER 
CONSIDERATIONS
discuss the stakeholders in the portfolio, the liabilities, the 
investment time horizons, and the liquidity needs of different types 
of institutional investors
Stakeholders of a university endowment include current and future students, alumni, 
current and future university faculty and administrators, and the larger university 
community. Each of these stakeholders has a strong interest in seeing the endow -
ment invested prudently. There is potential, however, for tension between increasing 
spending to meet current needs versus preserving sufficient funds to serve future 
generations. Endowment boards or investment committees, therefore, need to deter -
mine an appropriate balance.
University endowments are generally funded by gifts and donations from alumni. 
It is common that donors specify the handling and use of their gifts—for example, 
that only the income portion be spent or that only specific scholarships, programs, 
or departments benefit. Other gifts may be unrestricted and can be spent for gen -
eral purposes. Alumni are concerned about current students and faculty and also 
future generations, so they expect endowment assets to be invested for the long-run. 
Endowment payouts support the university’s operating budget and provide an important 
source of income. Endowments provide stability and continuity when other revenues 12
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 342
sources, such as tuition and government funding, fluctuate. Endowments also allow 
universities to more readily undertake long-term capital projects, knowing required 
resources are available to meet those future commitments.
Stakeholders of a university endowment often have representation on the endow -
ment’s board or investment committee, including alumni who are investment profes -
sionals running or working for financial services organizations.
University Endowments—Liabilities and Investment Horizon
Although most endowments operate on an asset-only basis, their main purpose is to 
support the university’s operating budget based on the principle of intergenerational 
equity. The investment horizon for endowments is thus perpetuity, and their main 
objective is to maintain long-term purchasing power. An endowment’s liabilities are 
the future stream of payouts to the university, which are typically codified in an official 
spending policy. The spending policy serves two important purposes: 1) to ensure 
intergenerational equity; and 2) to smooth endowment payouts to partially insulate 
contributions to the university from capital market volatility.
Although the spending policy defines how much of the endowment’s assets are 
paid out annually, several other liability characteristics should be considered when 
designing an appropriate investment policy, including:
a. What is the university’s capacity for fund-raising: How much in gifts and 
donations are contributed (on average) each year?
b. What percentage of the university’s operating budget is supported by the 
endowment?
c. Balance sheet health: Does the endowment or university have the ability to 
issue debt?
We first discuss different types of spending policies and then discuss other import -
ant liability-related characteristics. Broadly speaking, there are three different types 
of endowment spending policies:
1. Constant Growth Rule : The endowment provides a fixed amount annually to 
the university, typically adjusted for inflation (the growth rate). The inflation 
rate is usually based on the Higher Education Price Index (HEPI)2 in the 
United States or a more general consumer price index elsewhere, possibly 
with an additional spread. A shortcoming of constant growth spending 
rules is that spending does not adjust based on the endowment’s value. If 
the endowment experiences weak (strong) average returns, the spending 
amount expressed as a percentage of assets may become very high (low). 
This spending rule is therefore commonly complemented with caps and 
floors, typically between 4% and 6% of average assets under management 
(AUM) over one or three years.
2. Market Value Rule : The endowment pays a pre-specified percentage (the 
spending rate) of the moving average of asset values, typically between 4% 
and 6%. Asset values are usually smoothed using a 3- to 5-year moving aver -
age. A disadvantage of this spending rule is that it tends to be pro-cyclical; 
when markets have performed well (poorly), the overall payout increases 
(decreases).
2 The HEPI is calculated annually by Commonfund and tracks the most important components in the 
cost of higher education. More information can be found at https://  www  .commonfund  .org/  commonfund  
-institute/  higher  -education  -price  -index  -hepi .
University Endowments: Other Considerations 343
3. Hybrid Rule : Spending is calculated as a weighted average of the constant 
growth and market value rules. Commonly referred to as the Yale spending 
rule, weights can range from 30% to 70%. This spending rule was designed 
to strike a balance between the shortcomings of the respective spending 
rules.
All three spending rules can be summarized by the following formula:
 Spending Amount in Year  t + 1 
 = w × [Spending  Amount in Year  t × (1 + Inflation Rate)] + (1 − w) × Spending 
Rate × Average AUM,
where w denotes the weight put on the prior year’s spending amount. When w = 
1, the formula simplifies to a constant growth rule; when w = 0, it simplifies to a mar -
ket value rule. For any other choice of w (0 < w < 1), the formula represents a hybrid 
spending rule. Most US endowments use a market value spending rule, but some of the 
larger ones use a hybrid rule. As noted, a market value spending rule is pro-cyclical: 
This may not be an issue for universities that receive only a small percentage of their 
operating budgets from their endowment, but this may be more problematic otherwise. 
The goal of providing intergenerational equity means university endowments aim to 
maintain their purchasing power. Therefore, endowments target a real rate of return 
(after inflation) equal to or greater than their spending rates. Given that endowments 
pay out (on average) between 4% and 6% of assets annually, they typically target a 5% 
to 5.5% real, long-term rate of return.
Other liability-related factors must be considered when managing an endowment. 
Universities regularly raise money from donors. Depending on the wealth of their 
alumni base, such fund-raising activity may be more or less successful. Because of 
gifts and donations, endowments’ net spending rate tends to be lower than the head -
line spending of 4% to 6% of assets previously discussed. On average, net spending is 
closer to 2% to 4% of assets. Another important distinction between endowments is 
how much the university relies on its endowment to support the operating budget. 
Such support may be less than 5% for some universities, while in other cases, 40% to 
50% of the university’s operating budget is provided by its endowment. All else equal, 
endowments that support a smaller percentage of the overall budget should be able to 
tolerate more market, credit, and liquidity risk. In practice, however, this important 
distinguishing factor is typically insufficiently incorporated in the design of investment 
policies. It is common for university endowments to be benchmarked against each 
other, which creates herding behavior even though the organizations might have very 
different liability characteristics. A final consideration is the debt issuance capability 
of the endowment (or university). Some endowments access the public and private 
debt markets on a regular basis. The capability to access debt markets, especially 
during periods of market stress, affects the levels of risk and illiquidity endowments 
can accept in their investments.
University Endowments—Liquidity Needs
The liquidity needs of university endowments are relatively low (compared to foun -
dations). On average, endowments’ annual net spending is 2% to 4% of assets, after 
factoring in gifts and donations. Low liquidity needs combined with long investment 
horizons allow endowments to accept relatively high short-term volatility in pursuit 
of superior long-term returns. Consequently, many university endowments have rel -
atively high allocations to equity markets and illiquid private asset classes and small 
allocations to fixed income. Having significant allocations to illiquid asset classes, such 
as private equity and private real estate, creates additional liquidity needs to meet 
annual net capital calls from general partners managing these assets. Finally, to the 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 344
extent that endowments use derivatives for rebalancing or portable alpha strategies, 
there may be further liquidity needs—particularly during times of financial market 
stress—to meet margin calls or to cover higher collateral demands.
PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS
Stakeholders of a foundation include the founding family, donors, grant recipients, and 
the broader community that may benefit indirectly from the foundation’s activities. 
Each has a strong interest in seeing the foundation’s assets invested appropriately. As 
with university endowments, a tension may exist between increasing current grant 
spending versus preserving sufficient funds to serve future generations of grant recip -
ients. The founding family and donors typically want their donations to support grant 
recipients in perpetuity. There is a trend, however, toward limited-life foundations as 
donors seek to maintain control over foundation spending during their lives. Finally, the 
government (Internal Revenue Service in the United States) may also be a stakeholder 
because of the favorable tax treatment that foundations enjoy. The government’s main 
concern is that foundations remain engaged strictly in charitable work.
The boards of foundations tend to be different in terms of skill sets than the boards 
of endowments. University endowments typically have alumni sitting on their boards—
people with a special relationship to the university and who may have significant 
financial market skills (for example, in private equity or hedge funds). Board members 
for foundations, however, are typically individuals involved with grant making and 
not necessarily investment professionals. This difference in skill sets may affect the 
quality of board oversight, the level of delegation of decision making to investment 
staff, and the quality of investment decisions.
Mission-related investing  (also known as “ impact investing ”), which aims to 
direct a significant portion of assets in excess of annual grants into projects promot -
ing the foundation’s mission, is becoming increasingly important. For example, the 
Ford Foundation has allocated up to US$1.0 billion (more than 8% of assets) over 10 
years to investments related to its mission of addressing global inequality. The chal -
lenge for foundations is to ensure that mission-related investments generate financial 
returns commensurate with risks assumed. As typically lower yielding mission-related 
investments are undertaken at the expense of higher return investment opportunities, 
portfolio returns (expected and realized) may decline, which could result in foundation 
assets being spent down sooner and annual grant-making activities being reduced.
Private Foundations—Liabilities and Investment Horizon
In practice, the investment philosophy of private foundations is typically similar to that 
of university endowments, despite important differences between them in terms of 
liabilities and liquidity needs. Foundations and endowments both typically have perpet -
ual investment horizons (although, as noted shortly, some foundations may have finite 
lives) and both invest to maintain purchasing power; however, foundations generally 
have higher liquidity needs. In the United States, private grant-making foundations are 
legally required to pay out 5% of assets (on a trailing 12-month basis) plus investment 
expenses, while university endowments have more-flexible spending rules. In addition, 
foundations must spend any donations in the year received, known as flow-through 
(but this is not necessarily the case outside the United States). Foundations typically 
use a smoothing formula similar to that of university endowments to ensure payouts 
do not fluctuate with the market volatility of assets. The constant growth spending 
rule and the hybrid spending rule, discussed previously for university endowments, 
are rarely used by foundations.13
Private Foundations 345
Foundations sometimes issue bonds. The capability to access debt markets, espe -
cially during periods of market stress, is positively associated with the levels of 
investment risk and liquidity risk that foundations can accept in their investments. 
The Wellcome Foundation (United Kingdom), with a credit rating of AAA, has occa -
sionally issued bonds. For example, in early 2018, it issued £750 million of century 
bonds (i.e., 100-year maturity) with a coupon of 2.517%.3 Proceeds from such bonds 
have been used to support charitable work, and bondholders are repaid by the returns 
generated on the investment portfolio.
 
Spending Rate and Investment Expenses of Foundations
Costs of running a foundation are included in the 5% required payout, excluding 
investment expenses, which means the investment office is considered a cost 
center. Consequently, the investment office of a foundation will typically be much 
smaller compared to that of a similar-sized (by AUM) endowment, leading to 
potentially different investment behavior. For example, many small foundations 
have limited investment staff and therefore rely on an outsourced CIO model, 
whereby assets are managed by an external organization that assumes fiduciary 
duty and takes responsibility for the strategic asset allocation and investments 
across various asset classes. Although many outsourced CIOs do offer alloca -
tions to alternative asset classes, the result of such outsourcing may typically be 
a heavier allocation to public markets, more-intensive use of passive strategies, 
and a heavier reliance on beta as a driver of returns.
Many foundations typically receive a one-time gift from the founding family. 
Some foundations are allowed to raise money on an ongoing basis, but in the US, any 
such donations must be spent on a flow-through basis. Unlike universities that derive 
revenues from other sources besides their endowments, such as tuition and research 
grants, foundations rely almost exclusively on their investment portfolios to support 
operating budgets. This high dependency has important implications for risk toler -
ance, and as a result, foundations (on average) have more conservative, more-liquid 
investment portfolios compared to endowments.
Typically, the original gift must be maintained in perpetuity (principal protection). 
There is, however, a trend toward limited-life foundations , as some founders seek 
to maintain control of spending while they (or their immediate heirs) are still alive. 
For example, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is mandated to spend down 
assets to zero within 30 years of the Gates’ death. There is risk—and concern by 
some founding donors—that as the foundation’s leadership changes over time, the 
mission may move away from the founder’s vision. Thus, to minimize this risk, more 
limited-life foundations are being established. Importantly, a limited-life foundation 
faces a different investment problem than a perpetual foundation: As the investment 
horizon of a limited-life foundation shortens, its liquidity needs increase and risk 
tolerance decreases.
 
Real-Life Example of a Limited-Life Foundation
The Atlantic Philanthropies, set up by Chuck Feeney in 1982, is among the largest 
limited-life foundations to complete its grant-making activities. After giving a 
total of US$8 billion over 35 years to human rights, health care, and education 
3 In late 2017, Oxford University issued a century bond with the same size and similar coupon.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 346
causes, the last grant was made in 2016 and the Atlantic Philanthropies expects 
to close in 2020. All stakeholders have been informed of the spend-down pro -
cess and critical challenges are being addressed, including: 1) choosing who will 
oversee the portfolio wind-down process with staff departing for other employ -
ment opportunities; and 2) deciding how best to liquidate private investments. 
As a limited-life foundation gives away its assets, liquidity needs increase and 
risk tolerance decreases, resulting in lower financial returns and thus limiting 
the size of the grants that can be made. The de-risking process requires a very 
“hands-on” investment approach and includes liquidating private portfolios by 
reducing/stopping commitments, selling private portfolios in the secondary 
markets, and reinvesting distributions. This becomes increasingly challenging 
as talented investment staff depart the organization. Actions taken and lessons 
learned by The Atlantic Philanthropies provide a great case study for other 
limited-life foundations.
Private Foundations—Liquidity Needs
The liquidity needs of foundations are relatively low but still higher than those of 
university endowments. US foundations are legally required to spend 5% of assets 
or face a tax penalty. They must set aside monies to pay one-year grants and to meet 
annual installments for longer-term (typically two- to five-year) grants. Having a 
significant allocation to such relatively illiquid asset classes as private equity and 
private real estate creates additional liquidity needs to meet general partners’ annual 
net capital calls. Also, derivatives use for such activities as portfolio rebalancing or 
implementing portable alpha strategies may result in added liquidity demands to meet 
increased margin calls or to cover higher collateral demands (especially during times 
of financial market stress).
Exhibit 13  presents a summary comparison of foundations and endowments.
Exhibit 13: Comparison Between Private US Foundations and US University Endowments
  US Foundation US University Endowment
Purpose Grant-making for social, educational, and 
charitable purposes; principal preserva -
tion focus.General support of institution or restricted 
support; principal preservation focus.
Stakeholders Founding family, donors, grant recipients, 
and broader community that may benefit 
from foundation’s activities.Current/future students, alumni, university 
faculty and administration, and the larger 
university community.
Liabilities/Spending Legally mandated to spend 5% of assets + 
investment expenses + 100% of donations 
(flow-through).Flexible spending rules (headline spend -
ing rate between 4% and 6% of assets) with 
smoothing.
Other liability considerations Future gifts and donations, or just 
one-time gift?Gifts and donations, percentage of operating 
budget supported by endowment, and ability 
to issue debt.
Investment time horizon Very long-term/perpetual (except 
limited-life foundations).Perpetual
Risk High risk tolerance with some short-term 
liquidity needs.High risk tolerance with low liquidity needs.
Liquidity needs Annual net spending is at least 5% of 
assets.Annual net spending is typically 2% to 4% of 
assets, after alumni gifts and donations.
University Endowments: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 347
UNIVERSITY ENDOWMENTS: INVESTMENT 
OBJECTIVES AND ASSET ALLOCATION
evaluate the investment policy statement of an institutional investor
evaluate the investment portfolio of a private DB plan, sovereign 
wealth fund, university endowment, and private foundation
We now consider the investment objectives and investment policy statement for uni -
versity endowments and the investment objectives of private foundations.
University Endowments
A university endowment’s mission is to maintain the purchasing power of the assets 
into perpetuity while achieving investment returns sufficient to sustain the level of 
spending necessary to support the university budget. For a university endowment, 
investment policy and spending policy are intertwined, so the IPS should cover 
spending policy. As discussed previously, endowments use different spending rules. 
In general, endowments target a spending rate of about 5% of (average) assets. The 
effective spending rate will, however, be reduced after accounting for gifts and dona -
tions. An endowment’s primary investment objective is typically to achieve a total 
real rate of return (after inflation) of X% with an expected volatility of Y% over the 
long term ( K years). A common target for X% is 5%, with inflation being measured 
using the Higher Education Price Index (HEPI), to be achieved over 3 to 5 years (i.e., 
K = 3 or 5). The expected volatility of returns, Y%, is typically in the range of 10% to 
15% annually. Note that the target rate of return may also be expressed as a nominal 
(as opposed to real) return.
Endowments sometimes have secondary and tertiary investment objectives. A 
secondary objective might be to outperform the long-term policy benchmark. A 
third objective might be to outperform a set of pre-defined peers (e.g., outperform 
the average of the 20 largest university endowments). Peer comparison can lead to 
herding behavior and be detrimental to long-term success if the focus moves away from 
managing investments based on each organization’s unique liability characteristics to 
exploit their own comparative advantages. To achieve their objectives, endowments 
invest in a broad range of asset classes, including fixed income, public equities, hedge 
fund strategies, private equity, private real estate, and natural resources (e.g. energy 
and timber). Given that endowments aim to maintain the purchasing power of their 
assets, they tend to have significant allocations to real assets that are expected to 
generate returns commensurate with inflation.
The following box provides two examples of investment objectives found in IPSs 
for real-life endowments.
 
Investment Objectives of University Endowments
Oxford University Endowment: “The specific investment objective of the Oxford 
Endowment Fund is to grow our investors’ capital by an average of 5% per annum 
in real terms, and to achieve this at a lower volatility than would be experienced 
by investing solely in the public equity markets. ”
Source : Oxford Endowment Fund, www  .ouem  .co .uk/ the -oxford  -endowment  
-fund/  .14
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 348
Note : The Oxford Endowment Fund defines its investors as the University of 
Oxford, including 23 of its colleges and five associated foundations and trusts.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Endowment: “Our primary long-
term goal is to generate sufficient investment returns to maintain the purchasing 
power of the endowment after inflation and after MIT’s annual spending. Assuming 
inflation will average around 3% over the long-term and MIT’s spending rate will 
average around 5%, we need to earn approximately 8% to meet this goal. As a 
secondary check on the quality of our performance, we compare our returns to 
other endowments and to passive benchmark alternatives. ”
Source : www  .mitimco  .org/  wp -content/  uploads/  2017/  03/ MITIMCo  -Alumni  
-Letter  .pdf.
One of the lessons from the 2007–2009 global financial crisis is that liquidity risk 
must be managed carefully, particularly for institutions that invest heavily in illiquid 
assets. Most endowments now engage in detailed cash flow modeling for the illiquid 
portions of their portfolios, and some use a liquidity risk band as part of their over -
all risk profile. The liquidity risk band is defined as total NAV allocated to illiquid 
investments plus uncalled commitments to total fund AUM. If the liquidity band is 
violated (i.e., when the total allocation to illiquid investments exceeds a pre-specified 
upper bound), this may trigger a reduction (or even a stoppage) of commitments or 
possibly a sale of some illiquid investments in secondary markets to bring the overall 
illiquid allocation back to within the liquidity risk band.
EXAMPLE 5
Investment Objectives of the Ivy University Endowment
The hypothetical Ivy University Endowment was established in 1901 by 
Ivy University and supports up to 40% of the university’s operating budget. 
Historically, the endowment has invested in a traditional 20% public US equi -
ties and 80% US Treasury portfolio, entirely implemented through passive 
investment vehicles. The investment staff at the endowment is relatively small. 
With the appointment of a new chief investment officer, the investment policy 
is being reviewed. Endowment assets are US$250 million, and the endowment 
has an annual spending policy of paying out 5% of the 3-year rolling asset value 
to the university.
An investment consultant hired by the new CIO to assist with the investment 
policy review has provided the following 10-year (nominal) expected return 
assumptions for various asset classes: US equities: 7%, Non-US equities: 8%, 
US Treasuries: 2%, hedge funds: 5%, and private equity: 10%. Additionally, the 
investment consultant believes the endowment could generate an extra 50 bps 
per year in alpha from active management in equities. Expected inflation for 
the next ten years is 2% annually.
1. Draft the investment objectives section of the IPS of the Ivy University 
Endowment.
Solution:
The mission of the Ivy University Endowment is to maintain purchasing 
power of its assets while financing up to 40% of Ivy University’s operating 
budgeting in perpetuity. The investment objective, consistent with this mis -
sion, is to achieve a total real rate of return over the Higher Education Price 
Index (HEPI) of at least 5% with a reasonable level of risk; the volatility of 
returns should not to exceed 15% annually.
University Endowments: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 349
2. Discuss whether the current investment policy is appropriate given the 
investment objectives of Ivy University Endowment.
Solution:
Given the expected returns provided by the consultant, a portfolio of 80% 
fixed income and 20% public equities, invested passively, is expected to 
provide a nominal expected return of 3% per year (= 0.8 × 2% + 0.2 × 7%). 
Given, expected inflation of 2%, this implies a 1% real rate of return, which 
falls well short of the 5% spending rate and the stated objective of a 5% real 
rate of return. The endowment will see its purchasing power deteriorate 
over time if it continues with its current asset mix and spending rate.
3. What decisions could the CIO and board of the Ivy University Endowment 
take to align the investment policy and the spending policy?
Solution:
The CIO and board could either change the investment policy by adopting 
an asset mix that has a more reasonable probability of achieving a 5% real 
rate of return (an asset allocation including non-US equities and private 
equity); they could change the spending rate to more accurately reflect the 
expected real rate of return of the current investment policy; or the new 
CIO may want to recommend a combination of both.
Below is an example of a university endowment Investment Policy Statement. In 
this case the university endowment has clearly articulated primary and secondary 
investment objectives.
 
University Endowment Investment Policy Statement
A. Introduction
The hypothetical Ivy University Endowment Fund (the “Endowment”) 
has been established to fund scholarships, fellowships, faculty salaries, 
programs, activities, and facilities designed to promote and advance 
the mission of Ivy University (the “University”). This investment policy 
statement (IPS) is established by the Investment Committee of the 
Board of Trustees (the “IC”) for the guidance of the IC, the Investment 
Office, the Endowment’s investment managers, and other fiduciaries in 
the course of investing the monies of the Endowment. This IPS estab -
lishes policies and procedures for the administration and investment 
of the Endowment’s assets. This document formally defines the goals, 
objectives, and guidelines of the Endowment’s investment program.
B. Mission and Investment Objectives
The Endowment provides financial support for the operations of the 
University. Investment and spending policies are designed to balance 
the current goals of the University with its future needs, in order to 
achieve parity in supporting both current and future generations of Ivy 
students. The goal for the Endowment is to provide a real total return 
that preserves the purchasing power of the Endowment’s assets while 
generating an income stream to support the academic activities of the 
University.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 350
The primary investment objective of the Endowment is to earn an 
average annual real total return (net of portfolio management fees) 
of at least 5% per year over the long term (rolling five-year periods), 
within prudent levels of risk. Attainment of this objective will be 
sufficient to maintain, in real terms, the purchasing power of the 
Endowment’s assets and support the defined spending policy.
A secondary investment objective is to outperform, over the long 
term, a blended custom benchmark based on a current asset allocation 
policy of: 30% MSCI World Index, 20% Cambridge Associates LLC 
US Private Equity Index, 10% NCREIF Property Index, 10% Consumer 
Price Index for All Urban Consumers (annualized CPI-U) + 5%, 20% 
HFRI Fund of Funds Index, and 10% Citigroup US Treasury Index.
C. Spending Policy
The Endowment’s spending policy was developed to meet several 
objectives, namely to: (a) provide a sustainable level of income to sup -
port current operations, (b) provide year-to-year budget stability, and 
(c) meet intergenerational needs by protecting the future purchasing 
power of the Endowment against the impact of inflation. Under this 
policy, spending for a given year equals 80% of spending in the previ -
ous year, adjusted for inflation (CPI within a range of 0% and 6%), plus 
20% of the long-term spending rate (5.0%) applied to the 12-quarter 
rolling average of market values. This spending policy has two impli -
cations. First, by incorporating the previous year’s spending, the policy 
eliminates large fluctuations and so enables the University to plan 
for operating budget needs. Second, by adjusting spending toward a 
long-term rate of 5.0%, the policy ensures that spending levels will be 
sensitive to fluctuating market value levels, thereby providing stability 
in long-term purchasing power.
D. Asset Allocation Policy, Allowable Ranges, and Benchmarks
The single most important investment decision is the allocation of 
the Endowment to various asset classes. The primary objective of the 
Endowment’s asset allocation policy is to provide a strategic mix of 
asset classes that produces the highest expected investment return 
within a prudent risk framework. To achieve this, the Endowment 
will allocate among several asset classes with a bias toward equity 
and equity-like investments caused by their higher long-term return 
expectations. Other asset classes may be added to the Endowment to 
enhance returns, reduce volatility through diversification, and/or offer 
a broader investment opportunity set.
To ensure broad diversification among the major categories of invest -
ments, the Endowment has adopted the following capital allocation 
policy ranges for each asset class within the overall portfolio set forth 
in the Annex. This asset allocation framework is reviewed annually 
by the IC, but because of the long-term nature of the Endowment, 
changes to the framework are expected to be infrequent:
 
Asset ClassPolicy 
Range Benchmark
Global equity 20%–40% MSCI World Index
Private equity & 
venture capital15%–25% Cambridge Associates LLC US Private 
Equity Index
Private real estate 5%–15% NCREIF Property Index
University Endowments: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 351
Asset ClassPolicy 
Range Benchmark
Real assets 5%–15% Consumer Price Index for All Urban 
Consumers (annualized CPI-U) + 5%
Absolute return 
strategies15%–25% HFRI Fund of Funds Index
Fixed income & cash 5%–15% Citigroup US Treasury Index
 
The following core investment principles provide the foundation for 
the asset allocation policy:
 ●Equity dominance: Equities are expected to be the highest-per -
forming asset class over the long term and thus will dominate the 
portfolio.
 ●Illiquid assets: In general, private illiquid investments are expected 
to outperform more-liquid public investments by exploiting market 
inefficiencies.
 ●Global orientation: The Endowment will consider the broadest 
possible set of investment opportunities in its search for attractive 
risk/return profiles.
 ●Diversification: Thoughtful diversification within and between 
asset classes by region, sector, and economic source of return can 
lower volatility and raise compound returns over the long term.
E. Rebalancing
The IPS establishes the long-term asset allocation targets for the 
endowment and policy ranges for the various asset classes approved by 
the IC. The role of the capital allocation ranges is to allow for short-
term fluctuations caused by market volatility or near-term cash flows, 
to recognize the flexibility required in managing private investments, 
and to provide limits for tactical investing. The IC will rely on invest -
ment staff to determine allocations within the stated ranges and to 
regularly manage actual asset class allocations to be within the ranges 
where possible. In addition, the IC will review actual asset allocations 
relative to this asset allocation framework at each quarterly meeting.
F. Reporting
The Investment Team, with the oversight of management, must pro -
vide adequate reporting to the Board of Trustees, the IC, and other 
stakeholders. The reporting structure should include the following:
 ●Performance measurement and attribution for the quarter and 
trailing periods for the portfolio both in absolute terms and relative 
to the established benchmarks
 ●Asset allocation of the total portfolio
 ●Market value of the total portfolio
Asset Allocation
We now consider asset allocation, investment portfolios, and investment performance 
of university endowments. We follow with a similar discussion focusing on private 
foundations.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 352
University Endowments
Most large endowments follow the endowment investment model and rely heavily on 
alternative investments to achieve their long-term investment objectives. This approach 
is not without risks. During the global financial crisis, several large endowments faced 
significant liquidity challenges and were forced to either sell portions of their private 
investment portfolios in the secondary markets, reduce payouts to their universities, 
or issue bonds to bridge their liquidity needs. The rapid post-crisis recovery arguably 
bailed out many endowments, but had the crisis lasted longer, the pain would have 
been substantially worse. David Swensen, the longtime CIO of the Yale Endowment, 
and his colleagues have regularly warned against a blanket application of the endow -
ment model. Yale and some of the other large endowments have enjoyed a first-mover 
advantage in their private investments, and their alumni networks have provided access 
to investment opportunities that may not be as easily accessible to other institutions.
Exhibit 14  shows the average asset allocation for US endowments by size at the 
end of June 2020 using data from a study in which more than 800 colleges and uni -
versities participated. Here alternatives include private equity and venture capital, 
hedge funds and other marketable alternative strategies, private real estate, energy 
and natural resources (e.g., oil, gas, timber, commodities, and managed futures), and 
distressed debt.
These data reveal several important points. First, the larger endowments have 
a significantly higher allocation to alternatives. Larger endowments have achieved 
better returns over the past 10 years, and their larger allocation to alternatives has 
played an important role. Second, the larger endowments do not face the “home 
bias” issue that smaller endowments seem to suffer. The allocation of smaller endow -
ments to US equities is significantly larger than their allocation to non-US equities. 
Finally, the larger endowments hold a significantly smaller amount of their assets in 
fixed-income securities. This might pose a challenge during liquidity crises—such as 
in the 2007–2009 global financial crisis when some larger endowments struggling to 
meet their liquidity needs pressured managers of private investment funds to delay 
any calls (i.e., demands) for additional capital. Some universities also issued bonds 
during the crisis to help relieve the liquidity pressures faced by their endowments.
Exhibit 14: Average Asset Allocation for US University Endowments, as of 
June 2020 [note: x-axis is in US$ and y-axis is Allocation (%)]
501 Million
to 1 Billion101 Million
to 500 Million51 Million to
100 MillionUnder $25
Million25 Million to
50 MillionOver
1 Billion
US Equitie s Non-US Equitie s Fixed Income
Alternatives Cash and Shor t-Term Securitie s100
60708090
50
40
30
20
10
0
Source : TIAA and the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO), 
2020 NACUBO–TIAA Study of Endowments .
University Endowments: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 353
Exhibit 15  shows the average asset allocation at the end of June 2005 and June 2017 
for university endowments of more than US$1 billion in size. During this period, the 
largest endowments significantly increased their allocation to alternatives from 39% 
to 60%. This increased allocation to alternatives has come at the expense of public 
equities (reduced from 45% to 30%) and fixed income (reduced from 14% to 11%).
Exhibit 15: Average Asset Allocation for the Largest (> US$1 billion) US 
Endowments: FY2005 versus FY2020 [note: y-axis is Allocation (%)]
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
2005 2020
Equities Fixed Income Alternatives Cash
Sources : Commonfund and the National Association of College and University Business Officers 
(NACUBO), 2005 NACUBO–Commonfund Study of Endowments  and TIAA and the NACUBO, 
2020 NACUBO–TIAA Study of Endowments .
Given asset allocations that are tilted toward alternative investments, how have endow -
ments fared over the past 10 years? Exhibit 16  shows the average annual 10-year return 
(net of fees) for US endowments by size as of end-June 2020. The mean US Consumer 
Price Index was about 1.8% over the same period, while the mean Higher Education 
Price Index (HEPI) was 2.0%. Note: Larger endowments have generally been able to 
generate higher returns during this period. Endowments of more than US$1 billion have 
generated anywhere between 50 bps to 60 bps higher returns (annually) compared to 
the smaller endowments (with less than US$500 million). This difference compounds 
to a significant gap over a 10-year period. These higher returns have allowed the larger 
endowments to pay out a larger part of their assets to support their universities. It is 
worth noting that the 10-year period ending 30 June 2020 is time-period specific. A 
different 10-year period might lead to a different conclusion. However, this 10-year 
period is reasonably representative of long-term asset class returns because capital 
markets have generally rewarded growth assets over the period.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 354
Exhibit 16: Average Annual 10-Y ear Nominal Returns for US University 
Endowments as of June 2020 [note: x-axis is in US$ and y-axis is Nominal 
Return (%)]
0.0%1.0%2.0%3.0%4.0%5.0%6.0%7.0%8.0%9.0%
Over
1 Billion501 Million
to 1 Billion251 Million
to
500 Million101 Million
to
250 Million51 Million
to
100 Million25 Million
to
50 MillionUnder
25 Million
Source : TIAA and the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO), 
2020 NACUBO–TIAA Study of Endowments .
EXAMPLE 6
Investment Portfolio of the Ivy University Endowment
The hypothetical Ivy University Endowment was established in 1901 and sup -
ports Ivy University. The endowment supports about 40% of the university’s 
operating budget. Historically, the endowment has invested in a traditional 20% 
public US equities, 80% US Treasury portfolio, and it is entirely implemented 
through passive investment vehicles. The investment staff at the endowment 
is relatively small. With the appointment of a new chief investment officer, the 
investment policy is being reviewed. Endowment assets are US$250 million, 
and the endowment has a spending policy of paying out 5% of the 3-year rolling 
asset value to the university.
The new CIO has engaged an investment consultant to assist her with the 
investment policy review. The investment consultant has provided the following 
10-year (nominal) expected return assumptions for various asset classes: US 
equities: 7%, Non-US equities: 8%, US Treasuries: 2%, hedge funds: 5%, private 
equity: 10%. In addition, the investment consultant believes that the endowment 
could generate an additional 50 bps in alpha from active management in equities. 
Expected inflation for the next 10 years is 2%.
The new CIO was at a previous endowment that invested heavily in private 
investments and hedge funds and recommends a change in the investment 
policy to the board of Ivy University Endowment. She recommends investing 
30% in private equity, 30% in hedge funds, 30% in public equities (15% US and 
15% non-US with active  management), and 10% in fixed income. This mix would 
have an expected real return of 5.1% based on the expected return assumptions 
provided by the investment consultant.
Private Foundations: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 355
1. Given the expected return assumptions from the investment consultant, 
provide an asset mix that would be more appropriate for Ivy University 
Endowment?
Solution:
To achieve a 5% real rate of return, the endowment will need to accept sig -
nificantly more equity risk, diversify its assets internationally, allocate some 
of its assets to hedge funds and private equity, and engage in active manage -
ment. There are several possible combinations that could result in a portfo -
lio with a 5% expected real rate of return. Here are two possible asset mixes:
I: 40% in US equities with active management (7.5% expected return), 
40% in non-US equities with active management (8.5% expected return), 
10% in US Treasuries (2% expected return), 10% in hedge funds (5% 
expected return). This asset mix would result in an expected nominal 
return of 7.1% or an expected real return of 5.1%.
II: 50% in US equities with passive management (7% expected return), 
30% in non-US equities with active management (8.5% expected return), 
10% in US Treasuries (2% expected return), 10% in private equity (10% 
expected return). This asset mix would result in an expected nominal 
return of 7.25% or an expected real return of 5.25%.
2. Should the board approve the new CIO’s recommendation? Provide your 
reasoning.
Solution:
The board should reject the CIO’s recommendation. This is a very signifi -
cant departure from the current practice. The size of the investment team 
is small, and they have no prior experience in managing hedge fund and 
private equity portfolios (except for the new CIO). Additionally, given the 
size of the endowment, it is unlikely to have access to top quartile managers 
in the hedge fund and private equity spaces. The CIO should explain why 
the recommended asset mix with 60% in alternatives is preferable over asset 
mixes that deliver the same or higher expected real return (such as I and II 
in Solution 1).
PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS: INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES 
AND ASSET ALLOCATION
evaluate the investment policy statement of an institutional investor
evaluate the investment portfolio of a private DB plan, sovereign 
wealth fund, university endowment, and private foundation
As discussed previously, private foundations in the United States are legally required 
to pay out a minimum of 5% of assets annually to be eligible for tax-exempt status. 
Foundations strive to be capable of making grants that support their overall missions 
in perpetuity while meeting the minimum 5% payout requirement. The primary 15
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 356
investment objective for foundations is typically to generate a total real return over 
consumer price inflation of 5%, plus investment expenses, with a reasonable expected 
volatility (approximately 10%–15% annual standard deviation) over a 3- to 5-year period. 
A secondary investment objective may include outperforming the policy benchmark 
with a specified tracking error budget. Monte Carlo-based modeling for generating 
expected returns and risk distributions as well as liquidity modeling and asset stress 
testing mentioned earlier for DB pension plans are also used by management and 
consultants to develop cogent investment objectives and policies for foundations and 
endowments. Foundations, like endowments, invest in a broad range of asset classes, 
including fixed income, public equities, hedge fund strategies, and private equity.
The following box provides two real-life examples of investment objectives for 
foundations.
 
Investment Objectives for Private Foundations
Wellcome Trust (UK):
“Our overall investment objective is to generate 4.5% real return over the long 
term. This is to provide for real increases in annual expenditure while preserving 
the Trust's capital base to balance the needs of current and future beneficia -
ries. We use this absolute return strategy because it aligns asset allocation with 
funding requirements and provides a competitive framework in which to judge 
individual investments. ”
Note:  Wellcome Trust’s IPS mentions that the real return is based on an 
average of US and UK consumer price inflation.
Source:  Wellcome Trust, wellcome  .ac .uk/ about  -us/ investments .
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation:
“The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation is working to improve the health and 
well-being of everyone in America. Reflecting our Guiding Principles, ‘we act as 
good stewards of private resources, using them to advance the public’s interest 
with a focus on helping the most vulnerable. ’ ... Achieving comprehensive and 
meaningful change in health and health care will require sustained attention 
over many years to come. The Foundation therefore seeks to earn an investment 
return that, over time, equals or exceeds the sum of its annual spending, as a 
percentage of the Foundation’s assets plus the rate of inflation. This balance of 
investment return and spending is designed to spread risk and promote a steady, 
stable flow of support for our grantees. ”
Source:  Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, www  .rwjf  .org/  en/ about  -rwjf/  
financials  .html .
The IPS of a private foundation is not very different from that of a university 
endowment and follows a similar format as outlined in the previous section. The 
mission statement would be framed slightly differently, but the IPS would cover the 
same elements.
Private Foundations: Investment Objectives and Asset Allocation 357
Private Foundations
Foundations tend to follow a similar investment approach compared to endowments, 
despite important differences in their liability structures. Two of the most notable 
differences between foundations and endowments that should have a bearing on their 
asset allocation are that:
1. foundations support the entire budget of their organization, while universi -
ties have significant other sources of financing available besides the endow -
ment; and
2. foundations (in the United States) are mandated to pay out at least 5% of 
their assets to maintain tax-exempt status and typically receive no additional 
inflows in the form of gifts and donations (or, if there are gifts/donations, 
these need to be spent in the same year that they are received and do not 
count against the 5% mandated payout), whereas university endowments 
typically have a net payout of less than 5%.
Exhibit 17  shows the average asset allocations for US foundations by size and type 
at year-end 2016. The underlying data cover 203 institutions (123 private foundations 
and 80 community foundations). Here, alternative investments include private equity 
and venture capital, hedge funds and other marketable alternative strategies, private 
real estate, energy and natural resources, and distressed debt.
Exhibit 17: Average Asset Allocation for US Foundations as of Y ear-End 
2016 [note: x-axis is in US$ and y-axis is Allocation (%)]
Community Privat eCommunity Community Privat e Privat e
Over $500 Million $101 – $500 Million Under $101 Million
US Equitie s Non-US Equitie s Bonds
Alternatives Cash and Shor t-Term Securitie s100
60708090
50
40
30
20
10
0
Source : Council on Foundations–Commonfund, 2016 Council on Foundations–Commonfund Study 
of Investment of Endowments for Private and Community Foundations (CCSF) : www  .cof .org/  content/  
2016  -council  -foundations  -commonfund  -study  -investment  -endowments  -private  -and  -community .
These data highlight several key points. The larger foundations have a significantly 
higher allocation to alternatives, and private foundations have higher allocations to 
alternatives compared to community foundations. The largest private foundations (more 
than US$500 million) have about half of their assets invested in alternatives. Although 
not shown, the largest private and community foundations have similar allocations 
to marketable alternatives (hedge funds), but the private foundations have signifi -
cantly higher allocations to the higher-return-generating, illiquid alternatives—such 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 358
as private equity, venture capital, private real estate, and distressed debt. Smaller 
foundations seem generally to have a higher allocation to US equities compared to 
the larger foundations. Finally, the larger private foundations hold a smaller amount 
of their assets in fixed-income securities.
Foundations must generate real (net of fee) returns above 5% to maintain their pur -
chasing power. Exhibit 18  shows that over the 10-year period to year-end 2016 (when 
US CPI averaged 1.8%), US foundations have fallen well short of this minimum target. 
As a result, their purchasing power has deteriorated. However, during this period larger 
private foundations (more than US$500 million) have been able to generate higher 
returns—anywhere between 10 bps to 60 bps higher returns (annually)—compared to 
medium/small private foundations. Their larger allocation to alternatives likely played 
a key role in this outperformance. Note that the effective spending rate in 2016 was 
5.8% for private foundations.
Exhibit 18: Average Annual 10-Y ear Nominal Return for US Foundations as 
of Y ear-End 2016 [note: x-axis is in US$ and y-axis is Nominal Return (%)]
Community Private Community Community Private Private
Over $500 Million $101 – $500 Million Under $101 Million5.0
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.8
Source : Council on Foundations–Commonfund , 2016 Council on Foundations–Commonfund Study 
of Investment of Endowments for Private and Community Foundations (CCSF) : www  .cof .org/  content/  
2016  -council  -foundations  -commonfund  -study  -investment  -endowments  -private  -and  -community .
 
Real-Life Case Study: Wellcome Trust (UK)
Wellcome Trust (“the Trust”) provides a historical example of how a foundation 
transformed its investment approach and asset allocation and, in the process, 
significantly improved its investment performance. The Wellcome Trust was 
founded in 1936 and managed about £23 billion in its investment portfolio (as 
of end-September 2017). The investment portfolio supported all of the charitable 
work of the Trust, which provides funding for scientific and medical research 
to improve health worldwide. During FY2016–17, charitable grants were more 
than £1 billion.
Banks and Insurers 359
Between 1936 and 1986, the Trust was the sole owner of Burroughs Wellcome, 
the pharmaceutical company founded by Henry Wellcome. In 1986, the Trust 
began selling shares in the company and used the proceeds to diversify its assets. 
Over the two decades leading up to 2017, the portfolio generated an average 
annual (nominal) return of 14%. The overall investment objective was to generate 
a 4.5% real return over the long term. The Trust used to target a payout rate of 
4.7% of the weighted average value of the portfolio over the previous three years. 
Historically, this resulted in an average annual payout of 4.3%.
Daniel Truell joined the Trust as CIO in 2005 and initiated radical changes 
to its investment approach and asset mix, shifting from short-term, liquid, and 
low-risk assets to longer-term, less-liquid, and higher risk assets. The most notable 
changes were an increase in the allocation to private equity (including buyout and 
venture capital funds) and hedge funds as well as reduced allocations to public 
equities and cash. In addition to radically changing its allocations, the decision 
was made to concentrate assets with fewer managers and in fewer, higher quality 
investments, such that by 2017 less than 100 investments represented nearly 
85% of the portfolio’s value. The Trust also shifted to more direct investments, 
and active management in public equities was brought predominantly in-house 
and conducted by an investment team of more than 30 professionals.
At end-September 2017, the Trust’s investment portfolio consisted of 53% 
in public equities, 9% in hedge funds, 24% in private equity, 9% in property and 
infrastructure, 1% in commodity futures and options, and 4% in cash. The Trust 
has issued bonds totaling £2 billion—representing about 8% of total assets. 
Proceeds from the bond issuance are used for investments.
In 2017, the Trust adopted a new approach to determine how much to fund 
its charitable activities. According to the October 2017 IPS, the Trust “ targets an 
annual real cash spend in the Primary Fund (based on UK CPI) of  £900 million 
in 2017 prices. This level of spending will be reviewed in 2022, or earlier in the 
event of declines in the investment portfolio below  £20 billion in 2017 prices. ”
The Trust managed risk by ongoing monitoring of the following key risk 
factors: 1) 95% value-at-risk at a one-year horizon (if more than 20%, then this 
is highlighted to the Investment Committee), 2) foreign currency exposure (if 
more than 85%, then this is highlighted to the Investment Committee), 3) fore -
cast of cash levels (unencumbered cash should exceed 2% of gross assets within 
a 5-year forecast period), and 4) estimated equity beta for the portfolio should 
be in the range of 0.4 to 0.8.
Sources:  1. Wellcome Trust, “Investment Policy” (October 2017): https://  wellcome  .ac .uk/ 
sites/  default/  files/  investment  -policy  -october  -2017  .pdf. 2. Wellcome Trust, Annual Report 
and Financial Statements 2016  (https://  wellcome  .ac .uk/ sites/  default/  files/ Well  comeTrustA  
nnualRepor  tFinancial  Statements  _160930  .pdf). 3. Wellcome Trust, Annual Report and Financial 
Statements 2017 ( https://  wellcome  .ac .uk/ sites/  default/  files/  wellcome  -trust  -annual  -report  -and  
-financial  -statements  -2017  .pdf). 4. World Economic Forum, “ Alternative Investments 2020: The 
Future of Alternative Investments” (2015). 5. Steve Johnson, “Uncovering Little Investment Gems 
among the Shrunken Heads, ” Financial Times  (12 April 2014): www  .ft .com/  content/  c49bb40c  
-be63  -11e3  -b44a  -00144feabdc0 .
BANKS AND INSURERS
This section focuses on institutional investors that are also financial intermediaries, 
namely banks and insurance companies.16
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 360
Banks
Banks are financial intermediaries that take deposits, lend money, safeguard assets, 
execute transactions in securities and cash, act as counterparties in derivatives trans -
actions, provide advisory services, and invest in securities. The universe of banks is 
quite large and diverse, ranging from small community banks to global diversified 
financial services institutions. A precise estimate of total worldwide banking assets is 
difficult to obtain; nevertheless, using publicly available data from such sources as the 
Bank for International Settlements (BIS), Reuters, and individual balance sheets for 
the largest public banks, an estimate of more than US$100 trillion seems reasonable.4 
An order-of-magnitude estimate for bank equity capitalization works out to US$7 
trillion. Our focus here is on the largest, most globally important banks—the two to 
three dozen banks that account for the great majority of international commercial 
bank assets and liabilities. Exhibit 19  shows some of these banks, all of which are 
designated as global systemically important banks by the Financial Stability Board, 
an international body that monitors the global financial system.
Exhibit 19: Select Large Global Banks
Bank Country/Region
Industrial & Commercial Bank of China China
China Construction Bank Corp. China
Agricultural Bank of China China
Bank of China China
HSBC Holdings Plc Hong Kong SAR/United Kingdom
JPMorgan Chase & Co. United States
Wells Fargo United States
Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Japan
Bank of America United States
CitiGroup United States
Source:  Marie Kemplay, “Top 1000 World Banks 2021, ” The Banker , https:// top1000worldbanks  .com/  (20 
October 2021).
Insurers
The universe of insurance companies can be divided into two broad categories:
 ■Life insurers
 ■Property and casualty (P&C) insurers
According to the OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development) 
data on 35 large countries (ex-China and India), aggregate direct-insurance assets for 
both types of insurers had combined totals of more than US$22 trillion, with equity 
capitalization of more than US$2.2 trillion.5
4 Inter-company and cross-border transactions, non-contemporaneous reporting dates, differing account -
ing treatment (IFRS vs. GAAP , for example), and currency exchange rate conversions are inescapable 
complications.
5 OECD (2016) .
Banks and Insurers 361
The life insurance product set includes traditional whole and term insurance, vari -
able life insurance and annuity products, as well as health insurance. The P&C product 
suite encompasses insurance against a wide range of perils—covering commercial 
property and liability, homeowner’s property and liability, and automotive as well as 
such multiple specialty coverage lines as marine, surety, and workers’ compensation. 
Exhibit 20  lists some of the largest global insurance companies.
Exhibit 20: Select Large Global Insurance Companies
Entity Country/Region
AXA France
Zurich Insurance Group Switzerland
China Life Insurance China
Ping An Insurance China
Berkshire Hathaway United States
Prudential plc United Kingdom
Nippon Life Insurance Japan
Munich Re Group Germany
Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A. Italy
Japan Post Holding Co., Ltd. Japan
Allianz SE Germany
Source:  “Commercial Insurance, ” Insurance Information Institute, www  .iii .org/ publications/ commercial  
-insurance/ rankings (accessed 20 October 2021).
External Constraints Affecting Investment
The legal and regulatory environments, as well as tax and accounting constraints, 
faced by banks and insurers are complex and may vary according to the national and 
local jurisdictions in which these institutional investors do business. In this section, 
we take a high-level view of some of the major legal and regulatory constraints within 
which banks and insurers must operate. In the following section, we consider tax and 
accounting constraints that affect investing by banks and insurers.
Legal and Regulatory Constraints
For banks and insurance companies, the liabilities to depositors, the claims of policy -
holders, and the amounts due to creditors are clearly and contractually defined. This is 
different from the other types of institutions discussed previously where there typically 
can be a great deal of discretion in the timing and amounts due and paid to stakehold -
ers. Furthermore, banks and insurance companies carry out important functions with 
respect to the underlying economies in which they operate. These include facilitation 
of individual and commercial payments, extensions of credit, safeguarding of assets, 
and transfers of risk—to name the more important. The activities of companies in 
the financial industry not only are deeply intertwined with the non-financial, or real,  
economy, but their activities also are deeply intertwined with each other. Thus, a 
disturbance in the operation of individual banks and insurance companies can spread 
through the entire financial industry with great speed and with compounding damage; 
significant adverse effects can easily overflow into the real economy. Such negatives 
can include depositor runs on a banking system, credit crunches whereby companies 
or governments cannot obtain funding for maintaining operations, or the failure of 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 362
insurance companies that undermine the viability of large sectors of the economy, 
such as residential housing or the health care markets. Consequently, banking and 
insurance regulators in most jurisdictions are intensely focused on capital adequacy, 
liquidity, and leverage to mitigate systemic or contagion risk.
Banks and insurance companies are primarily regulated at national and state levels 
and are increasingly overseen by supranational regulatory and advisory bodies. The 
need to regulate banks and insurance companies at high, rather than local, levels stems 
from the fact that financial institutions are mainly large and spread across many local 
and national jurisdictions. At its most essential, the regulation of financial institutions 
centers on making sure banks and insurance companies have adequate capitalization 
to absorb losses rather than allowing losses to be borne by the rest of the financial 
system or the real economy—including depositors, insurance policyholders, creditors, 
or taxpayers.
Lowering the risk of assets through regulation is the first way to lower the potential 
strains on bank and insurance company capitalization. This can be through require -
ments for diversification, asset quality (including adequate reserve provisioning for 
credit, market, and operational risk losses) and liquidity maintenance. Likewise, setting 
requirements on liabilities can lower potential stress on bank and insurance capital 
resources. Such regulation of liabilities may include requirements for funding sources 
to be diversified over time and among different groups of depositors and debtholders. 
In the case of insurance companies, potential losses from liabilities can be regulated 
through rules limiting the size and concentration of potential policy claims. In addi -
tion to limiting potential losses from assets and liabilities—or from other operational 
risks—regulators may mandate certain minimum required capitalization.
Turning to insurers, the US insurance industry is regulated by individual states, 
each having its own administrative agency; the federal government does not play 
a major role in oversight. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
(NAIC), of which every state is a member, provides a forum for industry issues and 
sets accounting policies and financial reporting standards for the industry. In Europe, 
regulators have developed the Solvency II framework to standardize insurance reg -
ulation across member states.
The size and diversity of financial institutions result from powerful economies of 
scale. These economies of scale arise because most activities of banks and insurance 
companies (such as extension of credit, underwriting health or property risks, or 
taking of deposits) are made in large numbers, where the successes and failures of 
individual transactions are not normally highly correlated among each other. By the 
law of large numbers, the volatility of the weighted sum of independent risks decreases 
as a function of the square root of the number of independent risks assumed. This 
diversification effect would be a benefit to a financial firm that grows larger than its 
competitors. In fact, it would represent increasing returns to scale because the largest 
institution could hold a portfolio of assets with less capital than its competitors, because 
asset and liability volatility would be much less and would result in a higher and less 
volatile return on capital for the largest institution. Of course, offsetting factors keep 
this effect from dominating. Other marginal costs of operation, communications, 
and management keep the industry from eventually evolving into one giant financial 
firm. Nevertheless, the powerful impacts of diversification in terms of credit defaults, 
deposit funding, casualty insurance claims, and life-and-health mortality/morbidity 
claims are very strong factors in contributing to the existence of a small number of 
large national and international financial firms that comprise most of the financial 
industry’s assets and earnings.
These few large firms are regarded as systemically important financial institutions 
(SIFIs). Since the worldwide financial system meltdown of 2008–2009, legislators and 
regulators worldwide have moved in the direction of bolstering the financial system 
by raising capital requirements—directly, by requiring higher absolute amounts of 
Banks and Insurers 363
primary capital, and indirectly, by (1) effectively increasing the amount of capital 
needed to support the holding of certain investments, (2) limiting the payout of 
dividends and repurchases of common equity, and (3) making subordinated debt 
and preferred shareholders less able to assert their claims in the event of bank -
ruptcy or regulator-mandated restructuring. Furthermore, regulators’ actions have 
resulted in tightening regulations on the use of derivatives, proprietary trading, and 
off-balance-sheet liabilities/guarantees. These actions require institutions through 
stress testing to show how they can survive severe economic and financial market 
turbulence, and they impose more stringent accounting/disclosure rules and reserving 
requirements. The consequences of a relatively small number of SIFIs dominating the 
financial industry and the existence of regulatory cycles mean that the management 
of a financial institution must take into account the actions of its SIFI competitors 
and must integrate its asset and liability portfolio decisions with a view to where the 
rules are today and where they are likely heading.
Accounting and Tax Considerations
Three different types of accounting systems apply for every financial institution. For the 
enterprise and its subsidiaries, the first is standard financial accounting, whether in the 
form of GAAP or IFRS, and which is used for communicating results to shareholders 
(or members), deposit or policyholders, and suppliers of debt capital. Regulators of 
banks and insurance companies, in addition, impose a second type of accounting in 
various forms and known as statutory  accounting. Statutory accounting rules can be 
very different across different national and local regulatory jurisdictions. Although 
statutory results are normally available to the public, they mostly are utilized by 
regulators. Finally, the third type, true economic accounting, marks all assets and 
liabilities (net of imputed income taxes) to current market values.
Each accounting system is designed with a particular objective in mind, and it is 
incumbent upon financial institution managers and investment analysts to understand 
the purposes of all three. Economic or mark-to-market (MTM) accounting provides 
the best picture of an entity’s assets, liabilities, and changes in economic well-being. 
MTM earnings are the most volatile of all because they reflect all value changes con -
temporaneously rather than being smoothed over time. The results of MTM reporting 
are likely to differ from those from financial reporting, where the reporting rules are 
consistently and conservatively applied over time (but where asset and liability values 
may depart from reported balance sheet amounts). Financial reporting has moved 
increasingly in the direction of MTM accounting over the past several decades, 
although changes in asset and liability values often are reported by way of balance sheet 
comprehensive income accounts rather than directly through an income statement. 
On balance, financial reporting will provide the smoothest reporting of income and 
asset/liability valuations.
Statutory accounting represents essentially a system of adjustments to standard 
financial accounting. For both bank and insurance regulators, this means most signifi -
cantly the subtracting of intangible assets from asset and common equity accounts and/
or the acceleration of certain expenses, such as policy underwriting and sales costs. In 
other cases, it is the recognition and assignment of additional reserves against losses 
on assets or unexpectedly large losses on guarantees or insurance claims. Statutory 
accounting usually results in lower earnings and lower common equity capital than in 
financial accounting. Capital requirements for both banks and insurance companies 
are predicated on one or another version of statutory reporting.
In terms of taxation, banks and insurance companies typically are taxable entities, 
and the industry-specific tax rules can be quite complicated. As taxable entities, banks 
and insurance companies must manage their investment programs with consideration 
of after-tax returns.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 364
BANKS: OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
describe considerations affecting the balance sheet management of 
banks and insurers
Bank stakeholders include external parties (such as shareholders, creditors, customers, 
credit rating agencies, regulators, and even the communities where they operate) as 
well as internal parties (such as employees, management, and boards of directors). A 
bank’s investment program must meet the needs and expectations of multiple parties. 
Most large, international banks are typically companies with publicly issued securities, 
which are expected to maximize the net present value of shareholders’ capital. As will 
be seen shortly in greater detail, this hinges importantly on the ability of banks to 
manage the volatility of the value of shareholders’ capital.
On the liability side, bank customers are comprised of a variety of depositors, 
including individuals, corporations, and municipalities. Individuals deposit cash and 
depend on banks to safeguard their assets over time. Legal entities, ranging from small 
privately held companies to large publicly listed corporations, often have multiple 
banking relationships and depend on banks to provide financing throughout economic 
cycles. Similarly, municipalities and other public entities deposit funds and rely on 
banks’ safekeeping and transaction services. In addition, both for their own account 
and for the benefit of customers, banks are important counterparties to both publicly 
traded and over-the-counter derivatives transactions. Finally, most global banking 
institutions are significant issuers of fixed-income securities, either directly or via 
such other means as asset-backed trusts.
On the asset side, bank customers include both retail and commercial borrowers. 
Individuals borrow money from banks to finance large purchases, such as houses 
that are often financed with mortgages. On the corporate side, real estate developers 
often require bank financing through commercial real estate loans. Additionally, large 
companies require commercial and industrial loans from banks in order to finance 
working capital, ongoing operations, or capital improvements.
Internal stakeholders include a bank’s employees, management, and board of 
directors. Notably, the largest banks may each have more than 200,000 employees 
around the globe. At banks with a national or global presence, management teams are 
often highly visible in regulatory and economic affairs. At the regional and local level, 
bank management teams are often integrated within the local business community.
Banks—Liabilities and Investment Horizon
Banks are unique in that they originate assets (loans), liabilities (deposits, derivatives, 
fixed-income securities), and capital (preferred and common stock) in the normal 
course of business. The ability to originate and manage both assets and liabilities has 
implications for the management of a bank’s interest rate risk exposure (i.e., asset/
liability gap management) and the volatility of equity capitalization.
The largest component of bank assets is loans, typically comprising up to 50% or 
more of the assets of the large, international banks that dominate the sector. The next 
largest component of assets is debt securities, typically accounting for 25% or more 
of total assets. The largest remaining portion of assets consists of currency, deposits 
with central banks (e.g., Bank of Japan or Bank of England), receivables, and bullion.17
Banks: Other Considerations 365
Banks’ liabilities are comprised of deposits and also include short-term funding, 
such as commercial paper, as well as longer term debt. Deposits are the largest com -
ponent of liabilities, usually more than half of total liabilities. Bank deposits include 
the following:
 ■Time deposits  or term deposits  − These interest-bearing accounts have a 
specified maturity date. This category includes savings accounts and certifi -
cates of deposit (CDs). Banks have visibility on the duration of these depos -
its because they require advance notice prior to withdrawal.
 ■Demand deposits  − These accounts can be drawn upon regularly and 
without notice. This category includes checking accounts and certain sav -
ings accounts that are often accessible through online banks or automated 
teller machines (ATMs). Consequently, banks have limited visibility on the 
expected lives of these accounts and tend to assume they are short-term in 
duration.
In addition to deposits, banks can access wholesale funding, sources of which 
include Federal Funds, public funds, and other government-supported, short-term 
vehicles. Banks must actively monitor the expected cash outlays and timing of their 
liabilities. For time deposits, the amount and timing of the cash outlay are known, 
while for demand deposits, the amount is known but the timing is uncertain. Other 
liabilities comprise (1) long-term debt, 10%–15% of total balance sheet; and (2) such 
items as trading/securities payables and repurchase finance payables, also on the order 
of 10%–20% of balance sheet liabilities.
The tactical investment horizon for a bank’s investment portfolio is directly 
impacted by the nature and maturities of its asset base and liability structure.6 Although 
commercial banks, as corporations, have a perpetual time horizon (possibly longer 
than the other institutions in this reading), the instruments held in a bank portfolio 
tend to have far shorter maturities than those held by other financial institutions.
SUSTAINABILITY LINKED LOANS: PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT WHILE ALSO MANAGING RISK 
As per the Sustainability Linked Loan Principles, "Sustainability linked loans are 
any types of loan instruments and/or contingent facilities (such as bonding lines, 
guarantee lines or letters of credit) which incentivize the borrower's achievement 
of ambitious, predetermined sustainability performance objectives." These loans 
aim to support environmentally and socially sustainable economic activity and 
growth and look to improve the borrower’s sustainability profile by aligning loan 
terms to the borrower's performance against the relevant predetermined targets.
As some environmental and social issues such as carbon emissions, defor -
estation, water scarcity, and occupational health and safety become increasingly 
material for certain sectors, they could affect a company's ability to generate 
sustainable returns in the long term. Therefore, ensuring that corporates are 
managing such issues sufficiently well and avoiding any large negative impact 
on their ability to repay the loan is in the interest of providers of capital such as 
banks. In this context, a product such as a sustainability-linked loan provides 
the right incentive for corporates viz. a lower cost of capital, if they can manage 
the said risk(s) well. For banks, it is a way to manage and mitigate their credit 
risk exposure.
6 Its strategic horizon is perpetuity because of its corporate structure, which makes it as long, or longer, 
than many defined benefit plans, endowments, foundations, and sovereign wealth funds.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 366
Example:
During Q1 2021, ING together with Santander coordinated one of the largest 
sustainability-linked revolving credit facilities ever issued. Anheuser-Busch 
InBev (AB InBev), a multinational drinks and brewing company, was provided 
a USD10.1 billion revolving credit facility with a five-year term by a consortium 
of 26 leading global financial institutions.
The pricing mechanism incentivizes AB InBev to address four key perfor -
mance areas that are aligned with its sustainability goals:
1. Further improving water efficiency at AB InBev's breweries globally
2. Increasing PET recycled content in PET primary packaging
3. Sourcing purchased electricity from renewable sources as outlined in 
the RE100 commitment
4. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions as part of the science-based 
Climate Action Goal
The difference between the long time horizon of the institution and the much 
shorter maturity of most of its assets and liabilities may seem counterintuitive. Suppose 
that in the current market, the credit spreads on loans are narrow and the economy 
is nearing recession. The long-term horizon of the bank is evidenced by it: (1) cutting 
back new lending, (2) selling part of its existing loan portfolio, (3) increasing alloca -
tions to short-maturity, liquid securities, and (4) decreasing leverage through fewer 
large wholesale time deposits. The bank is sacrificing current earnings while looking 
forward to an uncertain time horizon when it can aggressively expand in the more 
favorable future environment. The long-term time horizon means that it expects to 
apply similar tactics—with medium to short-term maturity assets and liabilities—many 
more times over the indefinite future.
Banks—Liquidity Needs
Liquidity management is a core consideration in the management of bank portfolios. 
Given the short duration of deposits, as well as the potential need for increased 
liquidity in adverse market conditions, management and regulators have developed a 
robust framework around liquidity management for bank portfolios. Apart from asset 
or cash flow securitization, banks must have the ability to liquidate their investment 
portfolios within a certain period to generate adequate cash in the event of a crisis.
Bank liquidity needs have evolved since the global financial crisis of 2007–2009. 
Prior to that period, deficiencies in liquidity from deposits were made up with whole -
sale funding; banks would use their portfolios as a source of return so were invested 
in lower quality, less liquid securities. In the post-crisis environment, however, bank 
portfolios are increasingly comprised of higher quality, more liquid securities. This 
trend to more conservative management of investment portfolios has largely been 
driven by increased regulatory scrutiny on a global basis, most noticeably through 
the introduction of mandated liquidity coverage ratios (LCRs) and net stable funding 
ratios (NSFRs).7
7 LCRs require that highly liquid assets must constitute more than 100% of highly probable near-term 
expected cash outflows. NSFRs set minimum requirements for stable funding sources relative to assets; 
such stable sources include capital, long-term debt, and non-volatile deposits.
Insurers 367
In general, contrasting commercial banks and retail-oriented banks, commercial 
banks have a higher cost of funds and lower liquidity because of wholesale funding of 
loan commitments and other contingent commitments. Conversely, retail banks have 
a lower cost of funds and better liquidity because their retail deposits are relatively 
low cost and tend to be more stable.
INSURERS
The stakeholders of insurers include such external parties as shareholders, derivatives 
counterparties, policyholders, creditors, regulators, and rating agencies as well as 
such internal parties as employees, management, and boards of directors. Insurance 
companies are organized as either companies with publicly listed securities or mutual 
companies.
In North America and Europe, most large insurers are companies with publicly 
issued securities, with the inherent shareholder concerns and pressures. As such, there 
is significant interest and scrutiny on quarterly investment performance, corporate 
earnings, and balance sheet strength. Within this context, as with banks, optimal 
management must focus on the long-term maximization of net present value of share -
holders’ capital. Concretely, this requires balancing expected returns on investments 
and policy writing in such a way that all insurance liabilities will be met. This requires 
a very strong focus by management and regulators on maintaining tight control over 
the volatility of the value of shareholder capital. Capital must be maintained at all 
investment horizons and under all scenarios so that the company will be able to honor 
its obligations, especially to policyholders.
Mutual companies are owned by policyholders. Mutual companies either retain 
profits as surplus or rebate excess cash to policyholders in the form of dividends or 
premium reductions.8 Although mutual companies are free from the shareholder 
pressure for earnings performance, they have less access to capital markets than 
peers with publicly issued securities. Mutual companies remain quite prevalent in 
the United States, Canada, Japan, and many European countries. To provide certainty 
that policyholders are paid under all economic conditions, the need to control and 
maintain capital surplus is fundamentally the same as in the case of for-profit insurers.
Customers are primarily policyholders who have a need to protect themselves 
against specific risks. The main objective of any insurance company investment pro -
gram is to fund policyholder benefits and claims.
Given the nature and requirements of their product suite, life insurers maintain 
both a general account  and separate accounts . For traditional life insurance prod -
ucts and fixed annuities, insurers bear all the risks—particularly mortality risk and 
longevity risk, respectively—so they maintain a general account of assets to fund 
future liabilities from these products. However, in the case of variable life and variable 
annuity products, customers make investment decisions from a menu of options and 
themselves bear investment risk. Consequently, insurers invest the assets arising from 
these products within separate accounts. Exhibit 21  summarizes the main bearers of 
investment risk and the account structure for the major categories of insurance and 
annuity products.
8 Mutual companies can also increase the amount of “paid up insurance” for whole-life policies.18
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 368
Exhibit 21: Main Investment Risk Bearers for Different Insurance Products
Products Bearer of Investment Risk Account
Whole and term life insurance Company General
Universal life insurance Company General
Fixed annuities Company General
Variable life insurance Policyholder Separate
Variable annuities Policyholder Separate
The insurance industry is tightly regulated in most countries, usually by state or 
national authorities. The regulatory environment, including constraints impacting 
insurance asset management, will be discussed shortly. The rating agencies—including 
A.M. Best, Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s, and Fitch—are stakeholders in the manage -
ment of insurance investment portfolios because they monitor the financial stability 
of insurance companies and provide credit ratings and data on the industry to the 
investment community globally.
An insurance company’s management team and employees are also direct stake -
holders. The large global insurance companies may have thousands of employees spread 
over many countries. Their management teams are often highly visible in terms of 
regulatory and economic affairs. Clearly, the employees are impacted by the amount 
of risks taken on an insurance company’s balance sheet.
Insurers—Liabilities and Investment Horizon
Insurance companies manage their investment portfolios with an intense focus on 
asset/liability management (ALM). Within the insurance industry, the business line 
is critical because it determines the nature and structure of the liabilities. Further, 
effective management of liabilities is crucial to the long-term viability of any insur -
ance company.
Life Insurers
Broadly speaking, life insurers face a liability stream and time horizon with a long 
duration. Life insurance involves a range of products, including Individual Life, Group 
Life and Disability, Individual Annuity, and Retirement Plan products. Life insurance 
portfolios are comprised of asset accumulation products, with some nuances in the 
associated liability stream. The liability stream is driven by the predictability of claims, 
which can vary based on the specific product line. For example, Term Life products 
have a one-time payout and the predictability is relatively high using statistical and 
actuarial analyses on large portfolios with many policies. Meanwhile, annuity products 
involve an ongoing payout with shorter duration that is subject to longevity risk. The 
nature of the liability stream has important implications for the amount of investment 
risk that can be tolerated.
Within life insurance, product features and resulting liabilities as well as policy -
holder behavior are key determinants of the associated portfolios’ investment horizons. 
Historically, life insurance companies set portfolio return objectives with long time 
horizons of 20 to 40 years.
Insurers 369
Property & Casualty Insurers
In general, P&C insurers face a shorter duration liability stream and investment hori -
zon than life insurers. Further, P&C insurance involves events with lower probability 
of occurrence and potentially higher cost (especially in the case of natural disasters), 
leading to highly volatile business claims. This results in a liability stream with short 
duration and high uncertainty.
For example, a P&C insurance company may initiate policies against catastrophic 
events, such as hurricanes or other natural disasters. By definition, this insurance 
involves unpredictable and infrequent events that are difficult to hedge against. 
Insurance companies utilize statistical and actuarial analyses to forecast liability cash 
flows on a probabilistic (scenario) basis. P&C insurers may benefit from developing 
global, diversified portfolios that are more applicable to statistical analysis because 
of the law of large numbers. In any case, P&C insurers face a liability stream with a 
shorter duration and more potential volatility than life insurers.
MEASURING AND MANAGING PHYSICAL CLIMATE RISKS 
Environmental risks such as the physical impacts of climate change (e.g., floods, 
droughts, wildfires) are affecting our day-to-day lives both more frequently and 
on a larger scale than ever imagined. Physical risks might have financial impli -
cations for organizations, such as direct damage to assets and indirect impacts 
from supply chain disruption. Wildfires in California, the Amazon Forest, and 
Australia that caused billions of dollars in financial losses, in addition to the 
loss of life and to megacities such as Cape Town and Chennai almost running 
out of water, are just a few recent examples of how climate change and related 
global warming are accelerating the frequency and magnitude of such erratic 
weather patterns. 
For insurance companies, this increase in frequency of the hitherto infrequent 
and low-probability events poses a new set of modeling challenges. AXA S.A., a 
French multinational insurance company, for example, states that as of the end of 
2020, the annual average losses (AAL) for its real estate portfolio are estimated 
to be EUR4.3 million due to floods and EUR6.2 million due to windstorms. To 
manage these physical climate risks, AXA's models that assess the risk of natural 
hazards consider three components: the hazard (as defined by its severity and 
frequency), the exposure (as characterized by the building's physical properties), 
and the vulnerability (as defined by destruction rates, function of the hazard, and 
the exposure). These risk evaluation and management efforts would naturally 
evolve to consider potential financial impacts under various climate scenarios 
that are published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, such as 
the Representative Concentration Pathways 2.6 and 8.5 scenarios, which make 
predictions of how concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere (and 
thus global temperature rise) will change in the future because of human activities.
As these physical climate risks become more and more material, insurance 
companies will have to better understand their exposure to physical risk and 
chart appropriate adaptation efforts to limit such exposures.
With both life and P&C insurers, as with banks, the nature and timing of expected 
policy claims strongly influence the time horizon and nature of investments held. Even 
so, the ultimate management time horizon is perpetuity. A natural and frequently 
occurring example for both types of insurers is the case of underwriting cycles. Such 
cycles relate to the pricing of newly issued policies relative both to then-existing 
expected security returns and to the actuarial outlook for life and casualty loss claims. 
Long-term strategic investment and balance-sheet management policies result in 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 370
modifications to portfolios and overall company leverage at different points in time to 
adjust to the varying relative attractiveness of bearing investment risk versus bearing 
underwriting risk and/or financial (leverage) risk.
Insurers—Liquidity Needs
Insurance companies must actively manage and monitor the liquidity of their port -
folios. The level of liquidity required has important implications across the portfolio 
management process, including the insurer’s ability to utilize leverage. Further, liquidity 
needs can vary greatly based on the business line.
Both life and P&C insurers need a sound, two-part liquidity plan that includes 
internal and external components. An insurer’s internal liquidity includes cash and 
cash equivalents maintained on the balance sheet. Insurers must actively manage 
cash from operations (including investment income) that involves steady inflows 
and outflows. Further, insurers manage and project the cash flows from investment 
portfolio income and principal repayments. An insurer’s external liquidity includes 
the ability to issue bonds in the capital markets and to access credit lines through 
syndicated commercial bank credit lines or other lines of credit. Finally, insurers 
manage short-term liquidity by actively buying and selling repurchase agreements. In 
this way, insurers consistently manage both internal and external sources of liquidity.
The liquidity needs of life insurance companies must also be considered in the 
context of the interest rate environment. In periods of rising/high interest rates, 
insurance companies may face the risk of significant net cash outflow as policies are 
surrendered by customers searching for higher yields in other investments. P&C insur -
ers face uncertainty regarding both the value and timing of the payment of benefits. 
This significant cash flow uncertainty necessitates maintaining ample liquidity and 
results in P&C portfolios comprised of high proportions of cash and cash substitutes 
as well as short-term fixed-income instruments.
Insurers segment general account investment portfolios into two major components: 
reserve portfolio  and surplus portfolio . Insurance companies are typically subject 
to specific regulatory requirements to maintain a reserve portfolio that is intended 
to ensure the company’s ability to meet its policy liabilities. The surplus portfolio is 
intended to realize higher expected returns. Insurance companies manage reserve 
assets relatively conservatively. The size of the reserve portfolio is typically dictated by 
statute, and assets must be highly liquid and low risk. Meanwhile, insurance companies 
have more of an ability to assume liquidity risk in the surplus portfolio. Insurance 
companies are often willing to manage these assets aggressively with exposure to 
alternative assets, including private equity, hedge funds, and non-security assets.
BANKS AND INSURERS: INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
describe considerations affecting the balance sheet management of 
banks and insurers
We now consider the investment objectives of banks followed by a discussion of 
investment objectives and an investment policy statement for insurers.19
Banks and Insurers: Investment Objectives 371
Banks
The investment securities portfolio of a bank is an integral component of the overall 
banking enterprise. The primary objective of a bank’s securities investment portfolio 
is to manage the bank’s liquidity and risk position relative to its non-securities assets, 
derivatives positions, liabilities, and shareholders’ capitalization. Given the highly reg -
ulated nature of the industry, banks typically have formally documented investment 
policies as well as multiple levels of oversight in the form of internal committees and 
external regulators.
What follows provides a real-life example of how investment objectives are framed 
at banks.
 
Bank Investment Objective
JPMorgan Chase & Co., Treasury and Chief Investment Officer 
Overview
“Treasury and CIO is predominantly responsible for measuring, monitoring, 
reporting and managing the Firm’s liquidity, funding, capital, structural interest 
rate and foreign exchange risks. The risks managed by Treasury and CIO arise 
from the activities undertaken by the Firm’s four major reportable business 
segments to serve their respective client bases, which generate both on- and 
off-balance sheet assets and liabilities.
Treasury and CIO achieve the Firm’s asset-liability management objectives 
generally by investing in high-quality securities that are managed for the lon -
ger-term as part of the Firm’s investment securities portfolio. Treasury and CIO 
also use derivatives to meet the Firm’s asset-liability management objectives. ”
Source:  JPMorgan Chase & Co., Annual Report 2020 , www  .jpmorganchase  .com/  content/  dam/  
jpmc/  jpmorgan  -chase  -and  -co/ investor  -relations/  documents/  annualreport  -2020  .pdf.
Banks establish an asset/liability management committee (“ ALCo”) that provides 
direction and oversight of the investment portfolio. The ALCo has significant visibility 
with the bank’s management and board of directors, as well as with external regulators. 
This ALCo sets the investment policy statement (IPS), monitors performance on an 
ongoing basis, and has the ability to mandate adjustments on the asset and liability 
sides of the balance sheet. The ALCo also ensures that market (interest rate and FX), 
credit, liquidity, and solvency (capital adequacy) risk positions are within the limits 
of the bank’s specified risk tolerances. Once the overall investment objectives and risk 
levels are set, the investment team establishes policy benchmarks. The investment 
team monitors performance and such portfolio characteristics as duration and con -
vexity relative to the benchmark for each asset class. Further, the investment team 
may monitor performance relative to a set of peers with comparable business models 
and investment objectives. Finally, the investment team makes periodic presentations 
to senior management and the board of directors regarding performance and char -
acteristics of the investment portfolio.
Insurers
Given the highly regulated nature of the insurance industry, a detailed and 
well-documented Investment Policy Statement is of paramount importance. It is a 
best practice for an IPS to take a holistic approach and include the parent company’s 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 372
strategic enterprise risk management framework. Similar to banks, insurers manage 
their investment portfolios with a focus on liquidity as well as interest rate, foreign 
exchange, credit, and other risk factors.
The investment oversight function is a critical part of an insurer’s overall gover -
nance. Insurers typically have a committee on the board of directors that maintains 
oversight of all investment policies, procedures, strategies, and performance evaluation. 
Insurers provide significant transparency to their underlying portfolios—including 
showing the inherent duration, credit, and other risks to regulators and other external 
stakeholders.
The IPS should encompass the insurer’s appetite for market risk, credit risk, and 
interest rate risk. An insurer’s risk tolerance may vary relative to the competitive 
environment for various product lines, regulatory and tax changes, market conditions, 
and other factors. Moreover, the IPS should be a “living document” that evolves as 
market, regulatory, and business conditions change.
 
Hypothetical Life Insurance Company—Investment Policy 
Statement
i. Introduction
XYZ Life Insurance Company (“the Company”) underwrites and mar -
kets life insurance and annuity products. The Company is licensed 
to provide insurance products in all 50 US states, as well as several 
foreign countries. This investment policy statement (“IPS”) docu -
ments the policies and procedures that govern the Company’s general 
account securities portfolio. There are detailed policy statements for 
each asset segment within the portfolio that provide a more granular 
breakdown of investment guidelines.
ii. Governance and Stakeholders
The Company’s investment policies, including investment objectives 
and constraints, are the responsibility of the Investment and Finance 
Committee (“IFC”) of the board of directors (“BoD”). The insurer’s 
senior management team (“Mgmt”) is responsible for implementation 
of the investment program consistent with this policy. In turn, the 
investment team (“InvTeam”) manages the investment portfolio on a 
day-to-day basis.
The IFC will review the investment policy on an annual basis. The 
IFC must consider changes to the Company’s strategic direction, 
regulatory changes, tax changes, financial market conditions, and any 
other relevant factors that may arise. The IFC proposes adjustments 
to the IPS to the BoD, and all material changes must be approved by 
the BoD in their entirety.
The IFC has responsibility to employ appropriate resources for the 
management of the investment portfolio. The IFC may retain or 
dismiss InvTeam personnel at its discretion. Further, the IFC may 
retain investment consultants or other advisers to manage specific 
asset classes or other sub-components of the portfolio. All consul -
tant, external investment managers, and other advisers are required 
to comply with this IPS.
Banks and Insurers: Investment Objectives 373
iii. Mission and Investment Objective
The core mission of the general account is twofold:
1. Provide liquidity for the payment of policyholder claims in the 
normal course of insurance operations.
2. Grow the Company’s surplus over the long-term.
The investment objective must follow prudent investing practices 
and achieve an appropriate balance between maintaining short-term 
liquidity and contributing to long-term asset growth.
iv. Risk Tolerance and Constraints
The Company is subject to significant scrutiny from internal and 
external stakeholders, including shareholders, regulators, and others. 
The general account investment program must take into account the 
following key factors:
 ●Liquidity.  The investment portfolio must maintain sufficient 
liquidity to meet all policyholder claims that may arise on a short-
term and long-term basis. The InvTeam monitors investment cash 
flow to ensure the Company’s ability to meet all obligations in a 
timely manner. Further, the InvTeam may liquidate publicly traded 
securities as a secondary source of liquidity.
 ●Interest Rate Risk.  The InvTeam monitors the portfolio’s exposure 
to changes in interest rates, including the relative exposure of both 
assets and liabilities.
 ●Credit Risk.  The InvTeam monitors the credit (default) risk inher -
ent in the portfolio and must continually monitor the financial 
health of key counterparties.
 ●Foreign Exchange Risk.  The Company is subject to foreign 
exchange risk in the normal course of business. The InvTeam mon -
itors the aggregate foreign exchange risk of the portfolio.
 ●Regulatory Requirements.  All investments must adhere to the 
insurance code of the Company’s state of domicile as well as all 
other applicable domestic and foreign guidelines. Further, the 
investment program must comply with risk-based capital consider -
ations and rating agency requirements.
 ●Tax Considerations.  Further, the securities portfolio must account 
for tax considerations, and all investment decisions should be 
evaluated on an after-tax basis. The income tax planning of the 
Company may impact the timing of realization of capital gains and 
losses.
v. Asset Allocation Policy, Allowable Ranges, and Benchmarks
The primary investment vehicles within the Company’s investment 
portfolio will consist of highly liquid instruments, including US and 
foreign government obligations, corporate debt, and other fixed-in -
come instruments. Further, the Company may invest in private 
placement bonds, commercial mortgage loans, and other less liquid 
instruments within the parameters specified. Further, the Company 
may invest in real estate and private equity in order to enhance long-
term returns and contribute to the surplus growth of the company. 
However, strict guidelines apply for less liquid asset classes.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 374
The IFC establishes the strategic asset allocation that is consistent 
with the long-term constraints of the Company. The IFC will review 
the strategic asset allocation annually and may make adjustments as 
appropriate. Further, the IFC sets out allowable ranges of allocation 
for each asset class. Further, the IFC approves appropriate bench -
marks for each asset class upon consultation with the InvTeam.
vi. Investment Guidelines
The InvTeam should seek to diversify holdings in terms of economic 
exposure, counterparty, and other applicable attributes to the extent 
possible. Securities that are guaranteed by the US government or its 
agencies must constitute at least 25% of the portfolio.
vii. Reporting
The InvTeam, with the oversight of Mgmt, must provide adequate 
reporting to the BoD and other stakeholders. The reporting structure 
should include the following:
 ●Daily Flash Report: Summary of market values, yield, and interest 
rate position of entire portfolio
 ●Monthly Investment Performance Detail: Detailed investment 
performance by asset class, including market values, yields, and 
interest rate position
 ●Quarterly Investment Summary: Detailed analysis of market val -
ues, yield, and interest rate exposure, including long-term perfor -
mance metrics and attribution
BANKS AND INSURERS: BALANCE SHEET 
MANAGEMENT AND INVESTMENT CONSIDERATIONS
describe considerations affecting the balance sheet management of 
banks and insurers
We turn now to the portfolio investment strategy for banks and insurance companies. 
The objectives and constraints are very different from what we have seen with respect 
to pensions, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and foundations. In the case of 
banks and insurance companies, the need is to fund deposits, policy claims, derivatives 
payoffs, and debtholders. A financial institution’s fundamental purpose is to assure 
such contractual parties the full and timely payment of claims when they come due. 
A firm can only hope to earn a profit if it can provide counterparties assurance it will 
be able to meet all claims with extremely high probability.
The financial claims against banks and insurers may not always be known with 
certainty, but they are, at any point in time, measurable. Such measurement may require 
the use of probabilistic methods to account for such outcomes as: (1) the liquidation 
of bank deposits; (2) insurance policy claims and surrenders; (3) losses on derivatives, 
guarantees, or forward purchase commitments; and (4) returns on variable annuities, 
among other outcomes. Thus, in the case of banks and insurers, the well-defined, 
contractual nature of the financial claims, along with their measurability, imply 20
Banks and Insurers: Balance Sheet Management and Investment Considerations 375
that—unlike with defined benefit and defined contribution pension plans, sovereign 
wealth funds, endowments, and foundations—the underlying investment strategy is 
mainly liability driven investing (LDI as earlier defined).
We can obtain insight about both investment strategy and regulation of financial 
institutions by applying a fairly simple but intuitive economic model. The model’s 
first two equations define the relationship between an institution’s assets A, liabilities 
(claims) L, and residual equity of the institution’s shareholders or members E:
 A = L + E    (1)
 ΔA = ΔL + ΔE    (2)
Assets are equal to the sum of contractual claims and residual ownership. Likewise, 
all changes in assets must equal the sum of changes in the value of contractual claims 
and ownership interest (equity capitalization). These equations are set forth in terms 
of current market—or economic—values, which will not necessarily coincide with 
GAAP , IFRS, or regulatory/statutory values. However, using current market values 
will facilitate the subsequent application of these other accounting valuations.
These equations can be used to understand not just market value changes but also 
the impact of earnings, the consequences of adding or selling off assets in total, and 
changes in an institution’s capital structure. All of these are relevant to investment 
strategy and are additional layers of complexity as compared with the other portfolio 
strategies in this reading.
By multiplying the various terms by 1 (i.e., A ÷ A or L ÷ L), dividing both sides by 
E, and doing a little regrouping, we obtain a useful expression, namely:
    ΔA _ A     (    A _ E   )     =   ΔL _ L     (    L _ E   )     +   ΔE _ E    (3)
Using Equation 1  and moving liabilities and assets to the same side of the equation, 
we rewrite this as:
    ΔE _ E   =   ΔA _ A     (    A _ E   )     −   ΔL _ L     (    A − E _ E   )     =   ΔA _ A     (    A _ E   )     −   ΔL _ L     (    A _ E   − 1 )      (4)
Equation 4  provides an easy way to see how percentage changes in market value of 
both assets and liabilities are magnified by the leverage factors.
To demonstrate this point, Exhibit 22  presents the effects on the market value of 
the institution’s equity capital as a function of (i) declines in underlying asset value,9 
and (ii) beginning degree of leverage. Asset values can decline for several reasons, 
such as deterioration in credit quality and/or liquidity of loans or securities held. The 
value of assets can also be hurt by rising interest rates in the case of fixed-rate loans 
or securities.
Exhibit 22: Effects on Market Value of Equity Due to Change in Market Value 
of Assets (Given Beginning Degree of Leverage)
Beg. Equity 
to Assets 
RatioLeverage 
(x)Percentage Change in Institution’s Equity Value Due to 
Change in Asset Value of:
(E÷A) (A÷E) −0.5% −1.0% −1.5% −2.0%
20% 5.0 −2.5% −5.0% −7.5% −10.0%
15% 6.7 −3.3% −6.7% −10.0% −13.3%
9 Which, for our analysis, focuses on the investment portfolio assets. The net equity described here is 
net financial equity. The portion of an institution’s equity associated with financing other assets, such as 
buildings and equipment, are not a focus of this reading.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 376
Beg. Equity 
to Assets 
RatioLeverage 
(x)Percentage Change in Institution’s Equity Value Due to 
Change in Asset Value of:
(E÷A) (A÷E) −0.5% −1.0% −1.5% −2.0%
10% 10.0 −5.0% −10.0% −15.0% −20.0%
5% 20.0 −10.0% −20.0% −30.0% −40.0%
This analysis reveals that even small losses in the market value of assets can have a 
pronounced negative effect on the institution’s equity capital account because of the 
leverage factor. Naturally, it works in reverse; Small gains in assets can have a very 
positive impact for equity capital holders. These relationships give rise to a conflict 
of interest: Because equity capital holders can only lose the value of their investment 
but also can make extremely large gains if assets perform well, liability holders require 
some form of protection against the potential inclination of the institution to take 
excessive risks. Contractual, regulatory, and reputational methods all come into play 
to provide such protection. In one form or another, they relate to limiting the volatility 
of assets and providing for a capital cushion so that equity capital holders, rather than 
liability holders, are expected to absorb unforeseen losses on assets.
Similarly, financial institutions face the possibility of loss from adverse changes in 
the market value of liabilities. In the case of insurance companies, unexpectedly high 
policy loss claims are the most notable cause of expanding liabilities. For banks, it 
could be having to make a forward-funding commitment to a struggling company, the 
exercise of a guarantee, or a loss on forward currency purchase contracts. Exhibit 23  
uses Equation 4  to illustrate the effect on the market value of the institution’s equity 
capital as a function of (i) increases in its liabilities and (ii) beginning degree of leverage.
Exhibit 23: Effects on Market Value of Equity Due to Change in Market Value 
of Liabilities (Given Beginning Degree of Leverage)
Beg. Equity to 
Assets Ratio Leverage ( x)Percentage Change in Institution’s Equity Value Due 
to Change in Liability Value of:
(E÷A) [(A÷E) − 1] +0.5% +1.0% +1.5% +2.0%
20% 4.0 −2.0% −4.0% −6.0% −8.0%
15% 5.7 −2.8% −5.7% −8.5% −11.3%
10% 9.0 −4.5% −9.0% −13.5% −18.0%
5% 19.0 −9.5% −19.0% −28.5% −38.0%
Exhibit 23  bolsters the conclusions reached in Exhibit 22 . Mainly, liability holders, 
regulators, and owners (equity shareholders) of a financial institution all are motivated 
to limit the volatility and magnitude, relative to the base capital level, of market value 
changes in the institution’s liabilities.
Now we must integrate the analysis of both sides of the balance sheet with the 
capital management strategy of the financial institution. To do this, we would like to 
have a framework for understanding various interactions in a more rigorous manner. 
A customary starting point is with an analysis of interest rate risk. Our framework 
comfortably accommodates the standard duration-based model of value changes with 
respect to interest rate changes. In order to find the percentage change in the value of 
the institution’s equity capital associated with a change in the reference yield, y, on the 
asset holdings, we divide Equation 4  by the change in such yield, thereby obtaining:
    ΔE _ EΔy   =   ΔA _ AΔy     (    A _ E   )     −   ΔL _ LΔy     (    A _ E   − 1 )      (5)
Banks and Insurers: Balance Sheet Management and Investment Considerations 377
Likewise, we want to understand how this relates to the change in the effective yield 
on the liabilities, i. Multiplying by 1 = Δ i ÷ Δ i in the appropriate location, we restate 
Equation 5  as:
    ΔE _ EΔy   =   ΔA _ AΔy     (    A _ E   )     −   ΔL _ LΔi     (    Δi _ Δy   )       (    A _ E   − 1 )      (6)
Recall that the modified duration of asset W with respect to its yield-to-maturity, r, 
(  D  W  *   ) is defined as:
   D  W  *   = −   ΔW _ WΔr    (7)
This allows us to revise Equation 6  to a practical and intuitive analytical tool, namely,
   D  E  *   =    (    A _ E   )     D  A  *   −    (    A _ E   − 1 )     D  L  *    (    Δi _ Δy   )      (8)
Over reasonably modest yield changes, Equation 8  provides a useful way to break 
down the volatility of a financial institution’s equity capital as a function of degree of 
leverage, comparative (modified) duration of assets and liabilities, and correlation (or 
sensitivity) of changes in yields of assets and liabilities.
Exhibit 24  and Exhibit 25  show how sensitive the valuation of equity is to changes 
in the security portfolio yield for differing degrees of mismatching of asset and liability 
durations. In both these exhibits, the x-axis shows the duration of the financial insti -
tution’s liabilities, the y-axis shows the duration of its security portfolio assets, and 
the z-axis (vertical axis) shows the resulting duration of the institution’s shareholders’ 
equity. The yields on liabilities are assumed to move only 90% as much as the yields 
on portfolio assets. That is,
    di _ dy   =   Δi _ Δy   = 0.90 
Exhibit 24  and Exhibit 25  show results for differing initial degrees of leverage, as 
measured by the equity-to-assets ratio, which is 20% and 10%, respectively.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 378
Exhibit 24: Duration of Shareholders’ Equity as a Function of Asset and 
Liability Durations (Given Equity/Assets = 20% and Sensitivity of Yield 
Changes = 0.90)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30
0Duration of Shareholder  EquityEquity to  
Assets = 20%
di/dy = 0.90
0.500.250.751.001.251.501.752.002.502.25Duration of Liabilities
Duration of Shareholder  EquityDuration
of Securit y
Portf olio 
Assets 1.52.5
2.0
1.0
0.5
0
–5 to  0 0 to 5 5 to 10 10 to  15 –10 to  –5
Exhibit 24  indicates that, even at relatively high capital ratios of 20%, moderate dif -
ferences between asset and liability durations can imply durations for equity that can 
be sizable in either a positive or negative direction. Remember that, by definition, 
the modified duration of a zero-coupon bond is its final maturity divided by one plus 
its yield. Thus, by comparison, a 10-year zero coupon bond would have a modified 
duration around 9.75. Utilizing Equation 7 , a +/− 100 basis point change in interest 
rates when multiplied by a modified duration of 9.75 implies an approximate +/− 10% 
change in value. It is highly unlikely that regulators would like to see large asset/liability 
duration mismatches, since regulators want equity capital to remain stable in periods 
of large adverse interest rate changes.
Banks and Insurers: Balance Sheet Management and Investment Considerations 379
Exhibit 25: Duration of Shareholders’ Equity as a Function of Asset and 
Liability Durations (Given Equity/Assets = 10% and Sensitivity of Yield 
Changes = 0.90)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30
0Duration of Shareholder  EquityEquity to  
Assets = 10%
di/dy = 0.90
0.500.250.751.001.251.501.752.002.502.25Duration of LiabilitiesDuration
of Securit y
Portf olio 
Assets 1.52.5
2.0
1.0
0.5
0
–25 to  –20 –20 to  –15 –15 to  –10 –10 to  –5
0 to 5 5 to 10 10 to  15 15 to  20 20 to  25–5 to  0Duration of Shareholder  Equity
In Exhibit 25 , we see that lowering the equity capital ratio to 10% means that in order 
to avoid very high durations for equity capitalization, it is all the more necessary to 
keep assets and liabilities from having large differences in duration. It is often mis -
takenly thought that banks (and to a lesser degree, insurance companies) climb the 
yield curve by raising capital through the issuance of short maturity deposits that they 
then invest in longer duration loans and securities. The foregoing exhibits indicate 
the potential dangers of such an asset/liability mismatch. In Exhibit 25 , assuming a 
liability duration of close to zero (very short-term deposits and overnight borrowing), 
even if the security portfolio duration is only 2.5 years, the duration of shareholder’s 
equity reaches 25 years (about the equivalent of a 26-year zero coupon bond). In such 
a case, a +/− 100 basis point change in asset yields would produce a +/− 25% change 
in shareholder equity value. The loss potential is a danger that neither deposit holders, 
creditors, stockholders, nor regulators would be keen to embrace.
In actuality, in order to lower asset duration, financial institutions hold cash, depos -
its at central banks, foreign currency reserves, and other highly liquid (zero duration) 
assets. Also, as a means of lowering effective asset durations, banks typically make 
business loans that float according to market reference rates, which are expected to 
move in line with the variable cost of deposits. Likewise, credit card and many real 
estate loans are tied to variable rate indexes in order to minimize the sensitivity of 
values to interest rates. Moreover, many fixed-rate mortgage loans are securitized 
and sold off to private investors. All these foregoing techniques are ways of limiting 
the duration of asset portfolios.
On the liability side, there are many ways in which the duration of liabilities can 
be extended far beyond the implicit zero duration of demand deposits. These include 
issuance of intermediate and longer-term debt instruments, deeply subordinated capital 
securities, and perpetual preferred stock. Finally, banks can and do utilize financial 
futures and interest rate swaps to alleviate asset/liability mismatches.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 380
In the light of persistent low interest rates since the global financial crisis of 
2007–2009, many large international banks have an asset/liability structure where 
earnings are poised to benefit from a rise in interest rates. In such cases, the duration 
of assets is actually shorter than the duration of liabilities. This is clearly not the naïve 
“borrow short and lend long” strategy.
EXAMPLE 7
MegaWorld Bancorp has an equity capital ratio for financial assets of 9%. The 
modified duration of its assets is 2.0 and of its liabilities is 1.5. Over small changes, 
the yield on liabilities is expected to move by 85 bps for every 100 bps of yield 
change in its asset portfolio.
1. Compute the modified duration of the bank’s equity capital.
Solution:
Using Equation 8 , A ÷ E = 1/0.09 = 11.11; ( A ÷ E) − 1 = 10.11;   D  A  *    = 2.0;   D  L  *    = 
1.5; and Δ i ÷ Δy = 0.85.
Therefore, the modified duration of shareholders’ capital is:
   D  E  *    = (11.11 × 2) − (10.11 × 1.50) × 0.85 = 9.33
2. What would be the impact on the value of shareholder capital of a 50 basis 
point rise in the level of yields on its asset portfolio?
Solution:
Using the implications of Equation 7 , the change in equity capitalization 
value is computed as:
 0.5% × −9.33 = −4.67%.
3. Management is considering issuing common stock, selling investment 
portfolio assets, and paying off some liabilities in order to achieve an equity 
capitalization ratio of 10%. Assuming no change in the durations of assets 
and liabilities and assuming no change in the sensitivity of liability yields 
to asset yields, what is the resulting modified duration of the bank’s equity 
capital?
Solution:
With this less leveraged balance sheet, A ÷ E = 1/0.1 = 10; ( A ÷ E) − 1 = 9; 
and the duration of shareholders’ equity is:
   D  E  *    = (10× 2) − (9 × 1.50) × 0.85 = 8.53
4. Using the facts in question 3 but assuming the bank rebalances its invest -
ment portfolio to achieve a modified duration of assets of 1.75, what hap -
pens to the duration of the bank’s equity capital?
Solution:
The duration of shareholders’ capital now declines to:
   D  E  *    = (10 × 1.75) − (9 × 1.50) × 0.85 = 6.03
Banks and Insurers: Investment Strategies and Asset and Liability Volatility 381
BANKS AND INSURERS: INVESTMENT STRATEGIES 
AND ASSET AND LIABILITY VOLATILITY
Our previous discussion has given us some insight into the effects of leverage and 
the volatility of underlying assets and liabilities on the value of a financial institution’s 
equity. The degree of leverage was given; the sensitivity of changes in liability to asset 
yields ( di/dy ) was constant; and the durations of assets and liabilities varied. Although 
quite useful in many circumstances, such duration analysis captures the effects of only 
small changes in overall levels of interest rates and only over short time intervals.10 
Although of great significance, changes in the overall levels of interest rates are only 
one source of volatility. An expansion of Equation 4  is therefore necessary. A natural 
step is to extend it in a probabilistic way. We can thereby capture the volatility of the 
market value change in the financial institution’s equity capital as shown in Equation 
9. Volatility is defined here as standard deviation, where   σ    ΔE _ E     ,   σ    ΔA _ A     , and   σ    ΔL _ L      represent 
the standard deviations of the percentage changes in market value of equity capital, 
asset holdings, and liability claims, respectively.11 Furthermore, −1 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 denotes 
the correlation between percentage value changes of assets and liability claims.12
   σ    ΔE _ E    2   =   (    A _ E   )     2
   σ    ΔA _ A    2   +   (    A _ E   − 1 )     2
   σ    ΔL _ L    2   − 2   (    A _ E   )       (    A _ E   − 1 )    ρ  σ    ΔA _ A      σ    ΔL _ L      (9)
Equation 9  states the relationship in precise mathematical terms. It also incorporates 
the concept of correlation, which is an essential element of liability-driven investing. 
Exhibit 26  is a graphical representation of Equation 9  and illustrates the magnitude 
of the asset/liability correlation effect (ρ is measured on the x-axis) on the volatility 
of the financial institution’s equity capital (  σ    ΔE _ E      is measured on the y-axis) for various 
levels of leverage (the downward-sloping dotted lines). For purposes of this exhibit, 
the volatilities of asset and liability percentage value changes (  σ    ΔA _ A     ,   σ    ΔL _ L     ) are both 
assumed to be constant at 1.5%.
Exhibit 26  demonstrates that over the range of leverage shown (equity/assets ratios 
from 5% to 20%), the volatility of the financial institution’s equity capital decreases as 
the correlation between asset and liability value changes  (ρ) increases toward +1.0. This 
beneficial effect is most pronounced when the financial institution is highly leveraged.
For example, assuming leverage of 20% (assets/equity = 5x) and correlations (ρ) of 
0.5 and then 0.9, the volatility of equity declines from 6.9% to 3.5%. However, if higher 
leverage is assumed, at 5% equity/assets, and ρ takes the same two values, then the 
decrease in volatility of equity from 29.3% to 13.2% is more dramatic.
If the correlation between assets and liabilities is 1.0, the volatility of shareholders’ 
equity capital shrinks to minimal amounts, even for high leverage (equity to assets 
= 5.0%). However, the flip side is that any divergence in correlations—such as can 
often occur in turbulent markets—causes equity volatility to increase and especially 
dramatically when leverage is high.
10 Most notably, the duration model does not reflect well on non-linear factors, such as convexity and 
embedded options in many fixed-income securities and derivatives.
11 The variance of any random variable is equal to the square of the standard deviation of the variable.
12 Transforming Equation 4  into Equation 9  follows the basic statistical property that, for any random 
variable Z, which is a linear sum of two other random variables X and Y (specifically, Z = AX + BY), the 
variance of Z is   σ  Z  2   =  A   2   σ  X  2   +  B   2   σ  Y  2  + 2ABρ  σ  X    σ  Y   . This expression does not depend on the nature and shape 
of the underlying probability distributions of either X or Y.21
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 382
Exhibit 26: Volatility of Value of Shareholders’ Equity as a Function of 
Correlation of Asset and Liability Value Changes and Beginning Leverage
5% 10% 15% 20%Volatility
70
5060
40
2030
10
0
–1.00 1.00 –0.50 –0.75 –0.25 0 0.50 0.25 0.75
Beginning Equity to Assets RatioCorrelation
With the comprehensive framework provided by Equation 9 , we next turn to a brief 
catalogue, shown in Exhibit 27 , of how differing portfolio strategies and actions affect 
the inputs and thus the results of the volatility paradigm in Equation 9 . Before doing 
so, however, it is important to note that hedging with derivatives, duration-based 
portfolio management and funding, and other techniques for raising the correlation 
between asset and liability values are not a cure-all. High correlations between assets 
and liabilities are not easy to achieve in practice, and often breakdown during periods 
of financial industry stress or stress in an individual institution. In the final analysis, 
techniques for raising correlations are not a pure substitute for maintaining adequate 
capitalization buffers.
Exhibit 27: Investment Strategies and Effects on Bank/Insurer Asset and Liability Volatility
Portfolio Strategy 
ConsiderationsMain Factors 
Affected Explanation/Rationale Additional Regulatory Concerns
Diversified fixed-income 
investmentsDecreases   σ    ΔA _ A     Debt securities are less volatile than 
common equities, real estate, and 
other securities.Effective diversification involves a 
multiplicity of issuers and indus -
tries, both domestic and foreign.
High-quality bond/debt 
investmentsDecreases   σ    ΔA _ A     Overall, higher quality securities 
are less likely to be downgraded 
or default, thereby lessening the 
probability of significant loss of value 
through either losses or widening of 
credit spreads.Regulatory structures and central 
banks favor sovereign issuers most 
for this reason.
Banks and Insurers: Investment Strategies and Asset and Liability Volatility 383
Portfolio Strategy 
ConsiderationsMain Factors 
Affected Explanation/Rationale Additional Regulatory Concerns
Maintain reasonable 
balance between asset and 
liability durations, key rates 
durations, and sensitivity 
to embedded borrower and 
claimant optionsIncreases ρ Requires more in-depth analysis than 
simple duration-matching strategy, 
because must account for convex -
ity and asymmetric payoffs due to 
(i) defaults, (ii) principal payoffs 
prior to maturity, and (iii) annu -
ity, life-insurance policy, and bank 
CD surrenders in high interest rate 
scenarios.Regulatory structures penalize 
institutions with unjustifiable asset/
liability mismatches.
Common Stock InvestmentsIncreases   σ    ΔA _ A     , 
typically decreases 
ρEquity and other high-volatility assets 
provide only slight diversification 
benefits while adding to volatility. 
Also, common stock returns do not 
correlate well with financial institu -
tion returns, which pushes correla -
tion, ρ, away from 1.0 toward 0.0.Most regulatory structures require 
100% or more risk weighting for 
common stock investments thus, 
such investments are ineligible for 
backing financial liability issuance.
Derivatives transparency, 
collateralizationDecreases both   σ    ΔA _ A      and   σ    ΔL _ L      and 
increases ρWhether derivatives are used to 
hedge or synthesize (i) assets or (ii) 
liabilities, the more “plain vanilla” 
(and protected against counterparty 
default) they are, the less likely they 
will revalue in unexpected directions.Transparency fosters regulatory 
“financial stress test” confidence. It 
also allows regulators and claim -
ants to ascertain whether deriva -
tives are being used in a justifiable 
manner.
Liquidity of portfolio 
investmentsDecreases   σ    ΔA _ A     Includes short-maturity debt securi -
ties of highly rated issuers, currency 
reserves, access to credit lines, and 
access for banks to emergency central 
bank borrowing.Problems occur for regulators 
when financial contagion extends 
beyond just a few institutions.
Surrender penaltiesDecreases   σ    ΔL _ L     For typical life insurance, annuities, 
and bank deposits, such penalties 
cushion losses to financial institu -
tions for having to pay back liabilities 
“at par” when rising interest rates 
would otherwise have reduced the 
discounted present value of the 
obligations.Properly computed surrender 
penalties must account for interest 
rate volatility and slope of the 
yield curve. Typically, regulators/
customers do not tolerate econom -
ically justified surrender penalties 
(they are usually priced too low to 
offset the institution’s risk).
Prepayment penalties on 
debt investmentsIncreases ρ When interest rates are declining, 
borrowers must incur a penalty to 
repay loans at par to refinance.  
Also, prepayment penalties help 
institutions offset rising values of 
their fixed-rate liabilities in falling 
rate environments.None.
Catastrophic insurance risksIncreases   σ    ΔL _ L     By definition, these losses faced by 
insurance companies are less predict -
able and possibly very large.Regulators and insurance custom -
ers usually expect (i) higher capital 
ratios, (ii) higher quality and liquid 
investment portfolios, and (iii) 
strong reinsurance agreements 
compared with typical home, 
health, auto, and fire insurance.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 384
Portfolio Strategy 
ConsiderationsMain Factors 
Affected Explanation/Rationale Additional Regulatory Concerns
Predictability of underwrit -
ing lossesDecreases   σ    ΔL _ L     High frequency, low cost loss events 
caused by law of large numbers 
make total insurance liabilities less 
uncertain.Adverse changes in legal or reg -
ulatory systems cannot be offset 
by actions on the asset side of the 
financial institution. These are risks 
borne by owners of the institution’s 
equity capital.
Diversifying insurance 
businessDecreases   σ    ΔL _ L     Diversifying across several busi -
ness lines increases aggregate 
risk-reduction potential (due to law 
of large numbers).None.
Variable annuities Increases ρ, and   σ    ΔA _ A     ,   σ    ΔL _ L      diminish 
in relevanceWhere equity/bond market risks 
are fully borne by policyholders, the 
correlation between asset and liability 
returns approaches 1.0, indepen -
dent of investment performance of 
the underlying, segregated account 
assets.Assuming adequate risk disclosure 
to policyholders, and sufficient asset 
custody protections, regulators 
permit greater investment flexibility 
than in insurer’s standard business 
lines.
The last key implication of the aggregate risk framework in Equation 9  relates to the 
importance of raising equity capitalization externally. The ability to raise capital is 
not just the key to expanding operations; more importantly, it is a way of buffering 
financial uncertainty. It diminishes both the probability of default to liability holders 
and the total volatility of equity capitalization values.13 Over the past several decades, 
the financial industry has moved increasingly to publicly traded, for-profit, corpora -
tions, rather than mutual or membership co-ops. This is primarily because publicly 
traded companies can issue new common stock capital in cases of either opportu -
nity or emergency. Mutual and membership co-ops (for example, credit unions) are 
restricted by the growth of their membership, which usually cannot change much 
over short periods of time.
EXAMPLE 8
Foresight International Assurance is an international multiline insurance con -
glomerate. Under its overall strategic financial plan, it computes the annualized 
standard deviation of returns on investment assets as 5.0% and on liabilities as 
2.5%. The bulk of its liabilities are constituted by the net present value of expected 
claims payouts. The correlation between asset and liability returns is therefore 
a very low 0.25. Foresight’s common equity to financial assets ratio is 20.0%.
13 Although raising equity ratios negatively impacts return on common equity (ROCE) and earnings per 
share of financial companies, the diminished volatility of earnings and economic value acts toward raising 
price-earnings and market-to-book ratios. Perhaps somewhat counterintuitively, the issuing of common 
stock by financial companies can be neutral or even a net benefit to pre-existing shareholders.
Banks and Insurers: Investment Strategies and Asset and Liability Volatility 385
1. What is the standard deviation of changes in the value of Foresight’s share -
holder capitalization?
Solution:
We use Equation 9  recognizing that A ÷ E = 1/0.20 = 5; ( A ÷ E) − 1 = 4; the 
standard deviation of asset returns (  σ    ΔA _ A     ) = 0.05; the standard deviation of 
changes in liability values (  σ    ΔL _ L     ) = 0.025; and the correlation between asset 
and liability value changes (ρ)= 0.25.
First, we compute the variance of shareholders’ capital value changes:
   σ    ΔE _ E    2   =  5   2  ×  0.05   2  +  4   2  ×  0.025    2  − 2 × 5 × 4 × 0.25 × 0.05 × 0.025  = 0.06.  
The standard deviation of shareholder capital valuation change is the square 
root of the variance. Thus,
   σ    ΔE _ E     =  √ _  σ    ΔE _ E    2     =  √ _ 0.06    = 0.245 = 24.5% per year. 
2. Management believes the overall risk profile of the company is too high and 
desires to increase the common equity ratio by issuing additional shares 
of common equity and listing such shares on several international stock 
market exchanges. The new target equity ratio will be 25.0%. All other things 
being equal, how does this impact the volatility of value changes in share -
holder capitalization?
Solution:
The new asset to equity ratio is A ÷ E = 1/0.25 = 4, and so ( A ÷ E) − 1 = 3. 
Using the existing values of the other variables in Equation 9 , we obtain
   σ    ΔE _ E    2   =  4   2  ×  0.05   2  +  3   2  ×  0.025    2  − 2 × 4 × 3 × 0.25 × 0.05 × 0.025  = 0.038125  . 
from which we see   σ    ΔE _ E     =  √ _  σ    ΔE _ E    2     =  √ _ 0.038125    ≈ 0.195   = 19.5% per year.
3. Management believes it also needs to lower the volatility of its assets. It 
shifts out of low-quality bonds into higher quality, more liquid government 
securities and, by doing so, expects to lower the standard deviation of asset 
returns to 4.0% per year without having any impact on the correlation ratio 
between assets and liabilities. Along with the stronger capital ratios pre -
mised in question 2, what does this do to the volatility of shareholder equity 
value?
Solution:
Equation 9  now produces the following results:
   σ    ΔE _ E    2   =  4   2  ×  0.04   2  +  3   2  ×  0.025    2  − 2 × 4 × 3 × 0.25 × 0.04 × 0.025  = 0.025225  
from which we obtain   σ    ΔE _ E     =  √ _  σ    ΔE _ E    2     =  √ _ 0.025225    ≈ 0.159   = 15.9%. 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 386
4. What is the impact of the various portfolio and capitalization changes on 
the value of Foresight’s common shares outstanding? Explain your answer.
Solution:
We note that the proposed changes are likely to reduce earnings per share, 
first by having a greater number of shares outstanding and second by low -
ering the expected returns on assets (because there will now be a greater 
percentage of safer, lower yielding assets). All other things being equal, this 
would pressure the common stock price. However, Foresight is also lower -
ing its overall equity risk exposure while strengthening its reputation as a 
more soundly operated and capitalized insurance company. The lower risk 
profile might well result in a higher credit rating and a lower discount rate at 
which the lower earnings per share trajectory is valued. Also, the improved 
long-term survivability and underwriting strength could result in a higher 
long-term  growth outlook. In sum, the impact on common equity prices 
cannot be predicted merely by a change in capital structure and near-term 
reduction in earnings and portfolio expected returns.
BANKS AND INSURERS: IMPLEMENTATION OF 
PORTFOLIO DECISIONS
describe considerations affecting the balance sheet management of 
banks and insurers
With sovereign wealth funds, endowments, foundations, and employee benefit plans 
(DB and DC), the investment adviser must primarily focus on the investment of assets. 
In the case of financial institutions, optimal management must simultaneously focus 
on liabilities, particularly the volatility and convexity of asset and liability payouts. 
Consequently, the investment strategy of financial institutions must also consider the 
appropriate degree of leverage and total amount of common equity capital. Returning 
to the basic framework of Equations 2 and 4, the proper way to maximize long-term 
economic earnings thus might be to raise (lower) leverage through: (a) the acquisition 
(disposal) of portfolio assets; (b) the underwriting (retirement) of liabilities; or (c) the 
repurchase (issuance) of capital stock.
The financial management of a bank or insurer has not only to deal with the level 
and direction of interest rates, credit spreads, derivatives markets, economic cycles, 
and stock markets as they impact the investment portfolio, but we also now see it 
needs to have a keen understanding of the valuation of its own common equity and 
debt capital securities. Financial management also requires a view on the actions of 
competitors. For example, will they create a housing bubble through excessive lending 
to low-quality borrowers? Will they drive down insurance policy premiums through 
overly aggressive underwriting? Finally, financial management must satisfy all exist -
ing regulations as well as the ones that may evolve with changes in global economic 
circumstances and other political pressures.
In sum, financial and portfolio management of banks and insurance companies 
is an attempt to create positive net present value for capital holders by solving simul -
taneously several different conditions with several different variables. Consequently, 22
Banks and Insurers: Implementation of Portfolio Decisions 387
key decisions are typically made at the highest levels of the institution’s management. 
Specific analysts and investment managers are typically assigned only to specialized 
subsets of the institution’s varied assets and liabilities.
In such dynamically changing economic and regulatory environments, it is difficult 
to specify particular portfolio investment rules and policies. Therefore, the following 
mini-case studies are offered to provide illustrations of the types of high-level portfolio 
decisions that are required.
EXAMPLE 9
Mini-Case A:
A bank considers reducing its ownership of commercial loans in smaller busi -
nesses. These loans pay interest quarterly at various contractually pre-specified 
spreads above the floating market reference rate (MRR). The runoff of the loan 
portfolio through repayments, together with proceeds of outright sales and 
securitizations of other loans, are to be reinvested in a portfolio of fixed-rate 
government securities of comparable maturities. The securities will be hedged 
fully against general interest rate risk through the use of publicly traded options 
and futures on government securities. Additionally, hedging interest rate risk 
completely would create a synthetic variable rate asset. If interest rates rise, gains 
on hedges can be reinvested to raise overall portfolio income; if interest rates 
fall, losses on hedges will require some assets to pay counterparties, thereby 
lowering overall portfolio income.
1. How would this portfolio restructuring affect the asset/liability profile 
of the bank?
2. What is the expected impact on the volatility of bank shareholder 
equity valuation?
3. What is the likely impact on bank earnings?
4. What are reasons that argue in favor of this portfolio redeployment?
Solution to 1:
Switching from variable rate to fixed-rate assets of similar maturities increases 
the duration of the bank’s overall portfolio. However, entering into hedging posi -
tions with futures and options on fixed-rate assets has the effect of shortening 
overall duration. As described, the net effect of the portfolio alteration likely 
should have little effect on the bank’s existing asset/liability duration profile, 
because floating-rate corporate loans also have little price exposure in the event 
of rising or falling interest rates.
Solution to 2:
The overall volatility of assets and bank capitalization should decrease, because 
a hedged portfolio of government securities is more liquid than a portfolio of 
individual small business loans and also less subject to volatility arising from 
changes in credit default spreads on corporate loans.
Solution to 3:
Bank earnings would be expected to decline, independent of subsequent changes 
in the overall level of interest rates. This is because the yields on business loans, 
adjusting for expected default rates, are higher than on government securities, 
adjusting for the costs of hedging the government securities. Furthermore, if 
overall interest rates subsequently rise, the business loan portfolio would gen -
erate higher income to the bank. However, hedges on the government securities 
generate gains when interest rates rise—offsetting losses on the underlying 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 388
securities and thus permitting more money to be reinvested in now higher yield -
ing government securities. Similarly, a decline in interest rates would lead to a 
loss on the hedges and a sale of appreciated underlying government securities 
to cover these hedge losses. The portfolio value is approximately unchanged, but 
the (reduced) ability to generate income has tracked interest rates downward. In 
sum, changes  in overall interest rates impact income-generating ability similarly 
for both the loan portfolio and the hedged securities portfolio. This is the flip 
side of the coin; in other words, the two portfolios have similar modified dura -
tions. In any environment, the net yields on the hedged government securities 
are lower than on the business loans. Thus, bank net income is unambiguously 
lower because of the portfolio rebalancing.
Solution to 4:
Although the proposed redeployment is expected to lower bank earnings, there 
are at least three good reasons for this action, any of which would justify the 
decision: (a) the bank believes it needs to have a more liquid investment portfolio 
because of the risk of unexpected claims against assets; (b) the bank needs to 
raise its regulatory “equity to risky assets” ratio (by substituting low credit-risk 
for high credit-risk assets); and (c), the bank believes it will be able to reverse 
the trade in the future after a recession has driven up the effective default-ad -
justed spreads (i.e., driven down the prices) on small business loans. In all three 
rationales, overall volatility is expected to decline and the reduction in volatility 
is expected to provide a benefit that more than offsets the anticipated reduction 
in earnings. That is, the risk-adjusted return is projected to rise.
Mini-Case B:
A medium size insurance company plans to sell a large portion of its diversified, 
fixed-rate, investment-grade-rated securities in order to redeploy proceeds into 
a special purpose trust holding a diversified portfolio of automobile loans with 
original loan lives of 5 years. The loans are collateralized by direct liens on the 
vehicles, and the underlying borrowers meet minimum consumer credit scores set 
by a national credit rating agency. The underlying loans were randomly selected 
for the trust, and the collateral constitutes a nationwide sample of automobiles 
of different foreign and domestic manufacturers.
1. What does this transaction reveal about the regulatory capital of this 
insurer?
2. What key information must the insurer know about the automobile 
loans held by the trust in order to manage its asset/liability duration 
profile?
3. What external factors might the insurer need to consider with respect 
to the duration of trust assets?
4. What is the expected impact from the proposed investment transac -
tion on (a) the insurer’s earnings, and (b), the overall volatility of the 
insurer’s common equity capitalization?
Solution to 1:
The portfolio redeployment reduces the insurer’s liquidity. Given that the insurer 
is able to undertake this action, the company has excess regulatory capital, 
because the underlying illiquid loans require more regulatory capital than 
high-quality/investment-grade, marketable, fixed-income securities.
Banks and Insurers: Implementation of Portfolio Decisions 389
Solution to 2:
The insurer must make actuarial projections of contractual cash flows from the 
auto loans, which must take into account full and partial pre-payments because 
of accidents, auto trade-ins, and loan defaults. The acceptable credit quality 
of the borrowers and the geographical and brand diversity contribute to the 
accuracy of such predictions. The overall asset/liability profile for the insurer 
might well change depending on how the projected modified duration of the 
auto loan receivables compares with the investment-grade marketable securities 
to be sold. A material difference might require management to undertake (a) 
changes in the modified duration of the insurance company’s liabilities, such 
as by altering the maturities of future debt issuances; or (b), implementation of 
interest rate-hedging transactions.
Solution to 3:
The insurer must be concerned about an adverse change in the economic cycle, 
changes in technology, and/or energy prices—all of which could adversely impact 
the value of the auto loan receivables (as compared with the marketable securi -
ties portfolio to be sold) and which could undermine the cash flow assumptions 
made with respect to setting the company’s overall asset/liability profile.
Solution to 4:
The portfolio redeployment is likely to raise the insurer’s earnings, because the 
expected yield on the auto loans, net of credit losses, is higher than for invest -
ment-grade, liquid securities. However, the company is taking on more credit 
risk, which should translate into higher volatility of the value of assets and, thus, 
higher volatility of equity capitalization.
Mini-Case C:
Floating-rate securities, paying a fixed spread over the floating MRR, are trad -
ing at historically narrow yield spreads over MRR. In addition, issuers of these 
securities tend to be concentrated disproportionately in a small number of 
industries—notably in banks, insurers, and other financial services companies. 
A bank’s investment manager considers selling the bank’s portfolio holdings of 
these floating-rate securities, which have a 5-year maturity and trade at 0.1% 
over MRR. The proceeds will be used to buy more-diversified (by issuer type), 
investment-grade, fixed-rate securities that are selling at more normal spreads 
versus government bond yields of comparable duration (which trade at 1.0% 
over 5-year US Treasury bond yields). The fixed-rate securities portfolio is to 
be combined with pay-fixed/receive-floating interest rate swaps under standard 
mark-to-market collateralization terms. The 5-year interest rate swap terms 
permit one to receive MRR while paying 0.4% over Treasury yields.
1. What does the portfolio alteration do to required regulatory risk-
based capital?
2. What might indicate that the bank’s senior managers are more con -
cerned about risks to equity capitalization than are regulators?
3. What is the expected effect on the bank’s asset/liability profile?
4. What is the expected effect on expected earnings?
5. Summarize the rationale for the portfolio alteration.
Solution to 1:
To a first approximation, substituting one kind of marketable security for another 
should have little effect on regulatory risk-based capital requirements, because 
there is little apparent change in average credit quality. The new portfolio will 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 390
have more issuer and industry diversification than the securities being sold. Thus, 
under robust scenario simulation testing, the new portfolio should be somewhat 
more resistant to loss than the more-concentrated portfolio assets being sold.
Solution to 2:
The bank’s senior managers appear to be concerned about systemic risk in the 
financial sector, especially since the securities the bank plans to sell are concen -
trated in the financial sector and are trading at unusually high prices (narrow 
spreads to MRR). Apart from interest rate risk, the probability of underperfor -
mance for financial company securities is higher than for a diversified portfolio of 
fixed-rate securities. In the bank’s view, the prospective volatility of floating-rate 
bank assets—and thus, the company’s own equity capital—is higher than what 
is reflected in the regulatory risk-weight framework, because the latter does 
not take into account relative price risk. Thus, from the bank’s perspective, the 
proposed trade lowers asset and equity volatility.
Solution to 3:
Substituting fixed-rate securities in place of variable-rate securities tends to 
increase the modified duration of the bank’s assets. However, entering into a 
pay-fixed/receive-floating swap is equivalent to creating a synthetic liability, 
which becomes (i) smaller as interest rates rise and (ii) greater as interest rates 
fall. The interest rate swap can be tailored to offset the tendency of the newly 
acquired fixed-rate securities to lose value as interest rates rise and gain value as 
interest rates fall. Said differently, the synthetic liability increases the duration of 
the bank’s liabilities to counterbalance the rise in asset duration from replacing 
variable-rate with fixed-rate debt securities.
Solution to 4:
Earnings are expected to rise. The securities sold pay a low spread over MRR. 
The new package (fixed-rate securities plus pay-fixed/receive-floating interest 
rate swap) pays a higher expected spread over MRR. The high yield received 
on the fixed-rate securities, net of the fixed-rate leg of the interest rate swap 
paid, represents the new built-in spread that is then added to the MRR received 
in the floating-leg of the interest rate swap. Specifically, the new portfolio will 
(i) receive 5-year Treasury yield plus 1.0% on the fixed-rate securities, (ii) pay 
5-year Treasury yield plus 0.4% on the fixed leg of the interest rate swap, and (iii) 
receive MRR on the floating side of the interest rate swap. The net result is that 
the hedged, fixed-rate holdings will pay the bank the 5-year Treasury yield (T) 
+ 1.0% − (T + 0.4%) + MRR = MRR + 0.6%. This synthetic floating-rate portfolio 
compares with the original floating-rate portfolio that paid just MRR + 0.1%.
Solution to 5:
A pay-fixed/receive-floating interest rate swap is “plain vanilla”; it is easy to 
value and unwind. The trade would thus not have any major adverse impact 
on the institution’s liquidity. The bank, by selling securities in the banking and 
financial services industry, can lower its own exposure to systemic financial 
risk. In essence, the trade achieves better diversification while creating cheap 
(i.e., higher yielding) synthetic MRR floaters in place of true MRR floaters. The 
regulatory system in which the bank operates likely has a statistical system that 
penalizes excessive use of derivatives by deeming worst-case liabilities in a stress 
test. This should not be an issue assuming the proposed trade is small enough, 
relative to the institution’s size, to have no significant impact on stress test 
Banks and Insurers: Implementation of Portfolio Decisions 391
results. Overall, the trade would be a duration-neutral trade, achieving higher 
net earnings and lower asset and equity risk without significantly impacting the 
bank’s regulatory capital ratios.
Mini-Case D:
In the aftermath of prolonged financial turmoil and a recession, a large pan-Eu -
ropean life insurance company believes that corporate debt securities and asset-
based securities are now very attractive relative to more-liquid government secu -
rities. The yield spreads more than compensate for default and credit downgrade 
risk. Interest rates for government securities are near cyclical lows. The insurance 
company is concerned that rates may rise and that, as a result, many outstanding 
annuities might be surrendered. The insurer believes the probability of a large, 
adverse move in interest rates is much higher than is currently reflected by the 
implied volatility of traded options on government securities in the eurozone. 
The insurer’s regulatory capital and reserves are deemed to be healthy.
1. What are the consequences of lowering allocations to government 
securities and raising allocations to corporate and asset-backed 
securities?
2. Are there steps that the insurer should take on the liability side?
Solution to 1:
These proposed asset reallocations have several implications. First, corporate 
debt securities have higher yields and thus shorter durations than govern -
ment securities of similar maturity. Asset-backed securities tend to have lower 
effective durations than corporate and government bonds. Thus, the proposed 
rebalancing would likely lower the overall duration of the investment portfolio, 
which is consistent with the insurer’s concerns about rising interest rates and the 
expected consequences. Second, the change in portfolio allocation would likely 
lower the company’s overall liquidity and lower regulatory risk-based capital 
measures, because the new securities are treated less favorably for regulatory 
purposes (less liquid, higher credit risk corporate debt and asset-backed securities 
require a higher equity charge than liquid, low credit risk government securities, 
so regulatory “equity to risky assets” is reduced). Thus, the proposed portfolio 
moves make sense only if the regulatory capital position of the insurer is already 
ample and if the existing liquidity elsewhere in the portfolio is enough to fund 
an uptick of annuity surrenders in the case of rising interest rates. Finally, the 
reallocation would increase expected earnings (from higher interest income) 
and set the stage for price gains if credit spreads versus government securities 
contract to more normal levels.
Solution to 2:
Because overall interest rates are low, the company must also deal with an 
asymmetric risk separate and apart from the reallocation of its investment 
portfolio. In other words, the insurer must alter its liability profile in order to 
minimize potential adverse changes in its common equity capitalization. A 
spike up in interest rates could result in a rise in surrenders of annuities during 
a time when asset values are coming under pressure. Because the company is 
more concerned about higher interest rate volatility than is reflected in current 
option prices, the insurer might consider purchasing out-of-the-money puts 
on government securities and/or purchasing swaptions with the right to be a 
fixed-payer/floating-receiver. Sharp rises in rates would make both positions 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 392
profitable14 and offset some of the burden of premature annuity surrenders. If 
time passes without any substantial rise in interest rates, the cost of purchasing 
option protection would detract from the incremental benefits from the proposed 
switch into higher yielding securities.
SUMMARY
This reading has introduced the subject of managing institutional investor portfolios. 
The key points made in this reading are as follows:
 ■The main institutional investor types are pension plans, sovereign wealth 
funds, endowments, foundations, banks, and insurance companies. 
Common characteristics among these investors include a large scale (i.e., 
asset size), a long-term investment horizon, regulatory constraints, a clearly 
defined governance framework, and principal–agent issues.
 ■Institutional investors typically codify their mission, investment objectives, 
and guidelines in an Investment Policy Statement (IPS).
 ■Four common investment approaches to managing portfolios used by 
institutional investors are the Norway model, the Endowment model, the 
Canada model, and the Liability Driven Investing (LDI) model.
 ■There are two main types of pension plans: defined benefit (DB), in which a 
plan sponsor commits to paying a specified retirement benefit; and defined 
contribution (DC), in which contributions are defined but the ultimate 
retirement benefit is not specified or guaranteed by the plan sponsor.
 ■Pension plan stakeholders include the employer, employees, retirees, unions, 
management, the investment committee and/or board of directors, and 
shareholders.
 ■The key elements in the calculation of DB plan liabilities are as follows:
 ●Service/tenure: The higher the service years, the higher the retirement 
benefit.
 ●Salary/earnings: The higher the salary over the measurement period, the 
higher the retirement benefit.
 ●Mortality/longevity: The longer the participant’s expected life span, the 
higher the plan sponsor’s liability.
 ●Vesting: Lower turnover results in higher vesting, increasing the plan 
sponsor’s liabilities.
 ●Discount rate: A higher discount rate reduces the present value of the 
plan sponsor’s liabilities.
 ■DB plan liquidity needs are driven by the following:
 ●Proportion of active employees relative to retirees: More mature pension 
funds have higher liquidity needs.
14 A put option becomes valuable to the holder if prices of the underlying asset fall. A swaption with 
the right to enter a swap paying fixed and receiving floating is economically analogous to a put option 
on a bond. If rates rise, the swaption owner has the right to receive a rising stream of floating payments 
in exchange for what will have then become a stream of reasonably low fixed payments. The swaption 
contract will have gained in value.
Banks and Insurers: Implementation of Portfolio Decisions 393
 ●Age of workforce: Liquidity needs rise as the age of the workforce 
increases.
 ●Plan funded status: If the plan is well funded, the sponsor may reduce 
contributions, generating a need to hold higher balances of liquid assets 
to pay benefits.
 ●Flexibility: Ability of participants to switch among the sponsor’s plans or 
to withdraw from the plan.
 ■Pension plans are subject to significant and evolving regulatory constraints 
designed to ensure the integrity, adequacy, and sustainability of the pension 
system. Some incentives, such as tax exemption, are only granted to plans 
that meet these regulatory requirements. Notable differences in legal, reg -
ulatory, and tax considerations can lead to differences in plan design from 
one country to another or from one group to another (e.g., public plans vs. 
corporate plans).
 ■The following risk considerations affect the way DB plans are managed:
 ●Plan funded status
 ●Sponsor financial strength
 ●Interactions between the sponsor’s business and the fund’s investments
 ●Plan design
 ●Workforce characteristics
 ■An examination of pension fund asset allocations shows very large differ -
ences in average asset allocations by country and within a country despite 
these plans seeking to achieve similar goals. Such inter- and intra-national 
differences are driven by many factors, including the differences in legal, 
regulatory, accounting, and tax constraints; the investment objectives, risk 
appetites, and investment views of the stakeholders; the liabilities to and 
demographics of the ultimate beneficiaries; the availability of suitable invest -
ment opportunities; and the expected cost of living in retirement.
 ■The major types of sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) follow:
 ●Budget Stabilization funds: Set up to insulate the budget and economy 
from commodity price volatility and external shocks.
 ●Development funds: Established to allocate resources to priority socio -
economic projects, usually infrastructure.
 ●Savings funds: Intended to share wealth across generations by trans -
forming non-renewable assets into diversified financial assets.
 ●Reserve funds: Intended to reduce the negative carry costs of holding 
foreign currency reserves or to earn higher return on ample reserves.
 ●Pension Reserve funds: Set up to meet identified future outflows with 
respect to pension-related, contingent-type liabilities on governments’ 
balance sheets.
 ■Stakeholders of SWFs include the country’s citizens, the government, exter -
nal asset managers, and the SWF’s management, investment committee and 
board of directors.
 ■Given their mission of intergenerational wealth transfer, SWFs do not gen -
erally have clearly defined liabilities, so do not typically pursue asset/liability 
matching strategies used by other institutional investor types.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 394
 ■Sovereign wealth funds have differing liquidity needs. Budget stabilization 
funds require the most liquidity, followed by reserve funds. At the other 
end of the spectrum are savings funds with low liquidity needs, followed by 
pension reserve funds.
 ■The investment objectives of SWFs are often clearly articulated in the leg -
islative instruments that create them. They are often tax free in their home 
country, though must take foreign taxation into consideration. Given their 
significant asset sizes and the nature of their stakeholders, SWFs have aimed 
to increase transparency regarding their investment activities. In this regard, 
the Santiago Principles are a form of self-regulation.
 ■The typical asset allocation by SWF type shows budget stabilization funds 
are invested mainly in bonds and cash given their liquidity needs. Reserve 
Funds invest in equities and alternatives but maintain a significant alloca -
tion of bonds for liquidity. Savings funds and pension reserve funds hold 
relatively higher allocations of equities and alternatives because of their 
longer-term liabilities.
 ■Endowments and foundations typically invest to maintain purchasing power 
while financing their supporting university (endowments) or making grants 
(foundations) in perpetuity—based on the notion of intergenerational 
equity. Endowments and foundations usually have a formal spending policy 
that determines how much is paid out annually to support their mission. 
This future stream of payouts represents their liabilities. For endowments, 
other liability-related factors to be considered when setting investment 
policy are: 1) the ability to raise additional funds from donors/alumni, 2) the 
percentage of the university’s operating budget provided by the endowment, 
and 3) the ability to issue debt.
 ■Foundations and endowments typically enjoy tax-exempt status and face 
relatively little regulation compared to other types of institutional investors.
 ■Foundations face less flexible spending rules compared to endowments; 
foundations in the US are legally mandated to pay out 5% of their assets 
annually to maintain tax-exempt status. Endowments and foundations have 
relatively low liquidity needs. However, foundations have somewhat higher 
liquidity needs (vs. endowments), because they 1) typically pay out slightly 
more as a percentage of assets, and 2) finance the entire operating budget of 
the organization they support.
 ■Endowments and foundations typically have a long-term real return objec -
tive of about 5% consistent with their spending policies. This real return 
objective, and a desire to maintain purchasing power, results in endowments 
and foundations making significant allocations to real assets. In general, 
endowments and foundations invest heavily in private asset classes and 
hedge funds and have relatively small allocations to fixed income.
 ■Banking and insurance companies manage both portfolio assets and institu -
tional liabilities to achieve an extremely high probability that obligations on 
deposits, guarantees, derivatives, policyholder claims, and other liabilities 
will be paid in full and on time.
 ■Banking and insurance companies have perpetual time horizons. 
Strategically, their goal is to maximize net present value to capital holders; 
tactically, this may be achieved by liability driven investing (LDI) over inter -
mediate and shorter horizons.
Banks and Insurers: Implementation of Portfolio Decisions 395
 ■Financial institutions are highly regulated because of their importance to the 
non-financial, or real, sectors of the economy. Such institutions are also reg -
ulated in order to minimize contagion risk rippling throughout the financial 
and real sectors.
 ■The underlying premise of regulation is that an institution’s capital must be 
adequate to absorb shocks to both asset and liability values. This implies 
limiting the volatility of value of the institution’s shareholder capital.
 ■The volatility of shareholder capital can be managed by (a) reducing the 
price volatility of portfolio investments, loans, and derivatives; (b) lowering 
the volatility from unexpected shocks to claims, deposits, guarantees, and 
other liabilities; (c) limiting leverage; and (d) attempting to achieve positive 
correlation between changes in the value of assets and liabilities.
 ■Ample liquidity, diversification of portfolio and other assets, high invest -
ment quality, transparency, stable funding, duration management, diversifi -
cation of insurance underwriting risks, and monetary limits on guarantees, 
funding commitments, and insurance claims are some of the ways manage -
ment and regulators attempt to achieve low volatility of shareholder capital 
value.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 396
REFERENCES
OECD. 2016. OECD Insurance Statistics 2008–2016. https://  read  .oecd  -ilibrary  .org/  finance  -and  
-investment/  oecd  -insurance  -statistics  -2016  _ins _stats  -2016  -en #page1 .
Willis Towers Watson Thinking Ahead Institute. 2021. “Global Pension Assets Study 2021” 
(February). https://  www  .th inkingahea  dinstitute  .org/  research  -papers/  global  -pension  -assets  
-study  -2021 .
Practice Problems 397
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions 
1-5
Bern Zang is the recently hired chief investment officer of the Janson University 
Endowment Investment Office. The Janson University Endowment Fund (the 
Fund) is based in the United States and has current assets under management 
of $12 billion. It has a long-term investment horizon and relatively low liquidity 
needs. The Fund is overseen by an Investment Committee consisting of board 
members for the Fund. The Investment Office is responsible for implementing 
the investment policy set by the Fund’s Investment Committee.
The Fund’s current investment approach includes an internally managed fund 
that holds mostly equities and fixed-income securities. It is largely passively man -
aged with tight tracking error limits. The target asset allocation is 55% equities, 
40% fixed income, and 5% alternatives. The Fund currently holds private real 
estate investments to meet its alternative investment allocation.
1. Identify the investment approach currently being used by the Investment Com -
mittee for managing the Fund. Justify  your response.
Identify the investment approach currently being used by the Investment Committee 
for managing the Fund.  
(circle one)
Norway Model Endowment Model Canadian Model LDI Model
Justify your response.
  
  
 
2. Discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of the investment approach cur -
rently being used by the Investment Committee.
  Discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of the invest -
ment approach currently being used by the Investment 
Committee.
Advantages       
        
Disadvantages  
3. Describe  how each  of the following common characteristics of institutional 
investors supports the Fund’s allocation to private real estate:
i. Scale
ii. Investment horizon
iii. Governance framework
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 398
  Describe how each  of the following common charac -
teristics of institutional investors supports the Fund’s 
allocation to private real estate.
Scale  
Investment Horizon  
Governance Framework  
4. After a thorough internal review, Zang concludes that the current investment 
approach will result in a deterioration of the purchasing power of the Fund over 
time. He proposes a new, active management approach that will substantially 
decrease the allocation to publicly traded equities and fixed income in order to 
pursue a higher allocation to private investments. The management of the new 
investments will be outsourced.
Identify the new investment approach proposed by Zang for managing the Fund. 
Justify  your response.
Identify the new investment approach proposed by Zang for managing the Fund.  
(circle one)
Norway Model Endowment Model Canadian Model LDI Model
Justify  your response.
  
  
 
5. After a thorough internal review, Zang concludes that the current investment 
approach will result in a deterioration of the purchasing power of the Fund over 
time. He proposes a new, active management approach that will substantially 
decrease the allocation to publicly traded equities and fixed income in order to 
pursue a higher allocation to private investments. The management of the new 
investments will be outsourced.
Discuss  the advantages and the disadvantages of the new investment approach 
proposed by Zang.
       Discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of the new 
investment approach proposed by Zang.
Advantages       
        
Disadvantages       
The following information relates to questions 
6-12
William Azarov is a portfolio manager for Westcome Investments, an asset 
management firm. Azarov is preparing for meetings with two of Westcome’s 
clients and obtains the help of Jason Boulder, a junior analyst. The first meeting 
is with Maglav Inc., a rapidly growing US-based technology firm with a young 
workforce and high employee turnover. Azarov directs Boulder to review the 
details of Maglav’s defined benefit (DB) pension plan. The plan is overfunded and 
Practice Problems 399
has assets under management of $25 million. Boulder makes the following two 
observations:
Observation 1 Maglav’s shareholders benefit from the plan’s overfunded 
status.
Observation 2 The funded ratio of Maglav’s plan will decrease if employee 
turnover decreases.
Maglav outsources the management of the pension plan entirely to Westcome 
Investments. The fee structure requires Maglav to compensate Westcome with 
a high base fee regardless of performance. Boulder tells Azarov that outsourcing 
offers small institutional investors, such as Maglav’s pension plan, the following 
three benefits:
Benefit 1:  Regulatory requirements are reduced.
Benefit 2:  Conflicts of interest are eliminated from principal–agent issues.
Benefit 3:  Investors have access to a wider range of investment strategies 
through scale benefits.
In the meeting with Maglav, Azarov describes the investment approach used by 
Westcome in managing the pension plan. The approach is characterized by a high 
allocation to alternative investments, significant active management, and a reli -
ance on outsourcing assets to other external asset managers. Azarov also explains 
that Maglav’s operating results have a low correlation with pension asset returns 
and that the investment strategy is affected by the fact that the pension fund as -
sets are a small portion of Maglav’s market capitalization. Azarov states that the 
plan is subject to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) 
and follows generally accepted accounting principles, including Accounting Stan -
dards Codification (ASC) 715, Compensation—Retirement Benefits .
Azarov’s second meeting is with John Spintop, chief investment officer of the 
Wolf University Endowment Fund (the Fund). Spintop hired Westcome to assist 
in developing a new investment policy to present to the Fund’s board of directors. 
The Fund, which has assets under management of $200 million, has an overall 
objective of maintaining long-term purchasing power while providing needed 
financial support to Wolf University. During the meeting, Spintop states that the 
Fund has an annual spending policy of paying out 4% of the Fund’s three-year 
rolling asset value to Wolf University, and the Fund’s risk tolerance should con -
sider the following three liability characteristics:
Characteristic 1 The Fund has easy access to debt markets.
Characteristic 2 The Fund supports 10% of Wolf University’s annual budget.
Characteristic 3 The Fund receives significant annual inflows from gifts and 
donations.
The Fund has a small investment staff with limited experience in managing alter -
native assets and currently uses the Norway model for its investment approach. 
Azarov suggests a change in investment approach by making an allocation to 
externally managed alternative assets—namely, hedge funds and private equity. 
Ten-year nominal expected return assumptions for various asset classes, as well 
as three proposed allocations that include some allocation to alternative assets, 
are presented in Exhibit 1.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 400
Exhibit 1: 10-Y ear Nominal Expected Return Assumptions and Proposed 
Allocations
Asset Class Expected Return Allocation 1 Allocation 2 Allocation 3
US Treasuries 4.1% 45% 10% 13%
US Equities 6.3% 40% 15% 32%
Non-US Equities 7.5% 10% 15% 40%
Hedge Funds 5.0% 0% 30% 5%
Private Equity 9.1% 5% 30% 10%
Expected inflation for the next 10 years is 2.5% annually.
6. Which of Boulder’s observations regarding Maglav’s pension plan is correct?
A. Only Observation 1
B. Only Observation 2
C. Both Observation 1 and Observation 2
7. Which of the benefits of outsourcing the management of the pension plan sug -
gested by Boulder is correct?
A. Benefit 1
B. Benefit 2
C. Benefit 3
8. Westcome’s investment approach for Maglav’s pension plan can be best charac -
terized as the:
A. Norway model.
B. Canadian model.
C. endowment model.
9. The risk tolerance of Maglav’s pension plan can be best characterized as being:
A. below average.
B. average.
C. above average.
10. Based on Azarov’s statement concerning ERISA and ASC 715, which of the fol -
lowing statements is correct?
A. Maglav is not allowed to terminate the plan.
B. Maglav can exclude the plan’s service costs from net income.
C. Maglav’s plan must appear as an asset on Maglav’s balance sheet.
11. The risk tolerance of the Wolf University Endowment Fund can be best character -
ized as:
A. below average.
Practice Problems 401
B. average.
C. above average.
12. Which proposed allocation in Exhibit 1 would be most appropriate  for the Fund 
given its characteristics?
A. Allocation 1
B. Allocation 2
C. Allocation 3
The following information relates to questions 
13-15
The Prometheo University Scholarship Endowment (the Endowment) was 
established in 1950 and supports scholarships for students attending Prometheo 
University. The Endowment’s assets under management are relatively small, and 
it has an annual spending policy of 6% of the five-year rolling asset value.
13. Formulate  the investment objectives section of the investment policy statement 
for the Endowment.
14. Prometheo University recently hired a new chief investment officer (CIO). The 
CIO directs her small staff of four people to implement an investment policy 
review. Historically, the endowment has invested 60% of the portfolio in US equi -
ties and 40% in US Treasuries. The CIO’s expectation of annual inflation for the 
next 10 years is 2.5%.
The CIO develops nominal 10-year return assumptions for US Treasuries and US 
equities, which are presented in Exhibit 1.
Exhibit 1: Asset Class Return Assumptions
Asset Class10-Y ear Return Assumptions 
(Nominal)
US Treasuries 4.0%
US Equities 7.4%
Discuss whether the current investment policy is appropriate given the Endow -
ment’s annual spending policy.
15. Upon completion of the investment policy review by her four-person staff, the 
CIO makes some recommendations to the Endowment’s board regarding the 
investment objectives and asset allocation. One of her recommendations is 
to adopt the endowment model as an investment approach. She recommends 
investing 20% in private equity, 40% in hedge funds, 25% in public equities, and 
15% in fixed income.
Determine  whether the board should accept the CIO’s recommendation. Justify  
your response.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 402
Determine whether the 
board should accept the 
CIO’s recommendation. 
(circle one) Justify your response.
     Accept  
     Reject
16. Fiona Heselwith is a 40-year-old US citizen who has accepted a job with Lyricul, 
LLC, a UK-based company. Her benefits package includes a retirement savings 
plan. The company offers both a defined benefit (DB) plan and a defined contri -
bution (DC) plan but stipulates that employees must choose one plan and remain 
with that plan throughout their term of employment.
The DB plan is fully funded and provides full vesting after five years. The benefit 
formula for monthly payments upon retirement is calculated as follows:
 ■Final monthly salary × Benefit percentage of 2% × Number of years of 
service
 ■The final monthly salary is equal to average monthly earnings for the last 
five financial years immediately prior to the retirement date.
The DC plan contributes 12% of annual salary into the plan each year and is 
also fully vested after five years. Lyricul offers its DC plan participants a series 
of life-cycle funds as investment choices. Heselwith could choose a fund with a 
target date matching her planned retirement date. She would be able to make 
additional contributions from her salary if she chooses.
Discuss  the features that Heselwith should consider in evaluating the two plans 
with respect to the following:
i. Benefit payments
ii. Contributions
iii. Shortfall risk
iv. Mortality/longevity risks
        Discuss the features that Heselwith should consider in evalu -
ating the two plans with respect to the following:
Benefit Payments  
Contributions  
Shortfall Risk  
Mortality/ Longevity 
Risks 
17. Dianna Mark is the chief financial officer of Antiliaro, a relatively mature tex -
tile production company headquartered in Italy. All of its revenues come from 
Europe, but the company is losing sales to its Asian competitors. Earnings have 
been steady but not growing, and the balance sheet has taken on more debt in 
the past few years in order to maintain liquidity. Mark reviews the following facts 
concerning the company’s defined benefit (DB) pension plan:
 ■The DB plan currently has €1 billion in assets and is underfunded by €100 
million in relation to the projected benefit obligation (PBO) because of 
investment losses.
 ■The company to date has made regular contributions.
Practice Problems 403
 ■The average employee age is 50 years, and the company has many retirees 
owing to its longevity.
 ■The duration of the plan’s liabilities (which are all Europe based) is 10 years.
 ■The discount rate applied to these liabilities is 6%.
 ■There is a high correlation between the operating results of Antiliaro and 
pension asset returns.
Determine whether the risk tolerance of the DB plan is below average or above 
average. Justify your response with two reasons.
Determine whether the 
risk tolerance of the DB 
plan is below average or 
above average. (circle 
one) Justify your response with two reasons.
Below Average 1.
Above Average 2.
18. Meura Bancorp, a US bank, has an equity capital ratio for financial assets of 12%. 
Meura’s strategic plans include the incorporation of additional debt in order to 
leverage earnings since the current capital structure is relatively conservative. The 
bank plans to restructure the balance sheet so that the equity capitalization ratio 
drops to 10% and the modified duration of liabilities is 1.90. The bank also plans 
to rebalance its investment portfolio to achieve a modified duration of assets of 
2.10. Given small changes in interest rates, the yield on liabilities is expected to 
move by 65 bps for every 100 bps of yield change in the asset portfolio.
Calculate the modified duration of the bank’s equity capital after restructuring. 
Show  your calculations.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 404
SOLUTIONS
1. 
Identify the investment approach currently being used by the Investment Committee 
for managing the Fund.  
(circle one)
Norway Model Endowment Model Canadian Model LDI Model
Justify your response.
The investment approach currently used to manage the Fund’s assets is the Norway model. 
This approach is characterized by a heavy allocation to public equities and fixed-income 
securities with little allocation to alternatives and largely passively managed assets with 
tight tracking error limits.
2. 
        Discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of the 
investment approach currently being used by the Investment 
Committee.
Advantages       Advantages of using the Norway model are that investment 
costs/fees are low, investments are transparent, manager risk is 
low, and there is little complexity for a governing board (the model 
is easy to understand).
Disadvantages       The disadvantage of using the Norway model is that there is 
limited potential for value-added (i.e., alpha from security selection 
skills), above-market returns.
3. 
  Describe how each  of the following common characteristics of 
institutional investors supports the Fund’s allocation to private 
real estate.
Scale The Fund has $12 billion of assets under management. Its relatively 
large size allows it access to a broad investment universe and to 
investments that have a high minimum investment size, such as 
private real estate.
Investment Horizon Alternative investments, such as private real estate, require 
a long-term investment horizon. Janson, like most university 
endowments, has a long-term investment horizon and relatively 
low liquidity needs. This makes private real estate an appropriate 
investment and also helps the endowment maintain long-term 
purchasing power.
Governance 
FrameworkInstitutional investors usually operate under a formal governance 
framework. Janson has a well-structured governance framework that 
includes an Investment Committee that is part of the board over -
seeing the endowment’s investment portfolio. This framework also 
includes an Investment Office that implements the investment policy 
approved by the Investment Committee. The decision to invest in 
private real estate had to go through an approval process that is set 
and maintained by the governance structure in place.
Solutions 405
4. 
Identify the new investment approach proposed by Zang for managing the Fund.  
(circle one)
Norway Model Endowment Model Canadian Model LDI Model
Justify  your response.
The new investment approach proposed by Zang is the endowment model. This model 
is characterized by significant active management, a high allocation to alternative invest -
ments, and externally managed assets (which distinguishes it from the Canadian model, an 
approach that relies more on internally managed assets).
5. 
        Discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of the new 
investment approach proposed by Zang.
Advantages       The primary advantage of using the endowment model is a 
higher potential for value-added, above-market returns.
Disadvantages       The endowment model can be difficult to implement for small 
institutional investors because they might not be able to access 
high-quality managers. The endowment model may also be difficult 
to implement for a very large institutional investor because of the 
institutional investor’s very large footprint. Furthermore, relative 
to the Norway model, the endowment model is more expensive in 
terms of costs/fees.
6. C is correct. Both observations are correct. For a corporate defined benefit plan, 
Maglav’s shareholders are stakeholders. These stakeholders are interested in the 
sustainability of the pension plan, and the overfunded status is an asset on the 
balance sheet, potentially increasing the value of Maglav’s stock. The overfunded 
status also allows management to potentially lower employer contributions to the 
plan and increase net income. It also lowers financial risk, which may reduce vol -
atility in the stock price. In addition, decreasing employee turnover will increase 
plan liabilities and worsen the funded ratio. With high turnover, fewer workers 
will be vested and entitled to defined benefit payments. Conversely, if employee 
turnover decreases, expected vesting will increase, leading to higher plan liabili -
ties and a lower funded ratio.
7. C is correct. Scale (asset size) is a defining characteristic for institutional inves -
tors since it affects key aspects of the investment process. Maglav’s pension plan 
is small, with $25 million in assets under management. Smaller institutions may 
be unable to access certain investments that have a high minimum investment, 
such as private equity and real estate assets. These smaller institutions may also 
have difficulty in hiring skilled investment professionals. As a result, small insti -
tutional investors, such as Maglav’s pension plan, are more likely to outsource all 
or most of the investment operations to external asset managers or investment 
consultants.
8. C is correct. The endowment model operates in an asset-only context and is 
characterized by a high allocation to alternative investments, including private 
investments and hedge funds; significant active management; and outsourcing to 
external managers. These characteristics describe the investment approach used 
by Westcome. The skill in sourcing alternative investments is critically important 
given the large variation in performance among asset managers, especially for 
alternative investments.
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 406
9. C is correct. The risk tolerance for Maglav’s defined benefit plan is high and thus 
above average. Several factors influence the plan sponsor’s ability to assume 
risk. For Maglav, the overfunded status of the pension fund allows the plan to 
withstand more volatility, and its small size relative to the company size implies 
greater risk tolerance. The low correlation of Maglav’s operating results with 
pension asset returns also results in greater risk tolerance. Finally, the workforce 
characteristics imply greater risk tolerance. The younger workforce increases the 
duration of the plan liabilities and enables the sponsor to take on more liquidity 
risk. The high turnover of the workforce means fewer employees may be vested, 
reducing the number of employees entitled to receive defined benefit payments. 
All these factors contribute to an above average risk tolerance for Maglav’s de -
fined benefit plan.
10. C is correct. ASC 715, Compensation—Retirement Benefits  requires that an 
overfunded (underfunded) plan appear as an asset (liability) on the balance sheet 
of the corporate sponsor. Maglav’s plan is overfunded, so it appears as an asset on 
Maglav’s balance sheet.
11. C is correct. The risk tolerance of the Wolf University Endowment Fund is above 
average since endowments that support a small percentage of the university’s op -
erating budget (10% in this case) should be able to tolerate more market, credit, 
and liquidity risk. In addition, the Fund’s ability to access debt markets, especially 
during periods of market stress, increases the level of risk the endowment can 
accept in its investments. Finally, because of the significant inflows from gifts 
and donations, the effective spending rate will be lower than the annual spend -
ing policy of paying out 4% of the Fund’s three-year rolling asset value. Thus, the 
Fund can rely less on investment returns to generate the income stream needed 
to support the university and can accept higher-risk investments.
12. C is correct. Allocation 3 is the most appropriate allocation for the Fund. The 
annual expected returns for the three allocations are as follows:
 Allocation  1 exp. return = (0.45 × 4.1%) + (0.40 × 6.3%) + (0.10 × 7.5%) + (0.05 
× 9.1%)
   = 5.57%.
 Allocation  2 exp. return = (0.10 × 4.1%) + (0.15 × 6.3%) + (0.15 × 7.5%) + (0.30 
× 5.0%) + (0.30 × 9.1%)
   = 6.71%.
 Allocation  3 exp. return = (0.13 × 4.1%) + (0.32 × 6.3%) + (0.40 × 7.5%) + (0.05 
× 5.0%) + (0.10 × 9.1%)
   = 6.71%.
The real return for Allocation 1 is 3.07% (= 5.57% – 2.50%), and the real return 
for Allocation 2 and Allocation 3 is 4.21% (= 6.71% – 2.50%).
Therefore, Allocation 1 is not appropriate because the expected real rate of 
return is less than the annual spending rate of 4%. With expected spending at 4%, 
the purchasing power of the Fund would be expected to decline over time with 
Allocation 1.
Allocations 2 and 3 both offer an expected real rate of return greater than the 
annual spending rate of 4%. Thus, the purchasing power of the Fund would be 
expected to grow over time with either allocation. However, Allocation 3 is more 
appropriate than Allocation 2 because of its lower allocation to alternative assets 
(hedge funds and private equity). The total 60% allocation to alternative assets 
Solutions 407
in Allocation 2 is well above the 15% allocation in Allocation 3 and is likely too 
high considering the Fund’s small investment staff and its limited experience with 
managing alternative investments. Also, given the Fund’s relatively small size of 
assets under management ($200 million), access to top hedge funds and private 
equity managers is likely to be limited.
13. The mission of the Prometheo University Scholarship Endowment is to pro -
vide scholarships for students attending the university. In order to achieve this 
mission, the Endowment must maintain the purchasing power of the assets in 
perpetuity while achieving investment returns sufficient to sustain the level of 
spending necessary to support the scholarship budget. Therefore, the investment 
objective of the endowment should be to achieve a total real rate of return (after 
inflation) of at least 6% with a reasonable level of risk.
14. GUIDELINE ANSWER:
 ■The policy is not appropriate.
 ■The expected real return of 3.54% is less than the spending policy rate of 6%.
 ■Therefore, the current allocation and investment objectives are not 
sustainable.
The nominal expected return on the current portfolio, according to the nomi -
nal return assumptions in Exhibit 1, is 6.04% per year (0.6 × 7.4% + 0.4 × 4.0% = 
6.04%). The expected real return is approximately 3.54% (6.04% – 2.5% = 3.54%), 
which is below the 6% spending rate and the stated objective of a 6% real re -
turn. Therefore, this real return is not sufficient to meeting the spending policy, 
which makes the Endowment’s goals unsustainable. The Endowment will need to 
change its asset allocation to earn higher returns and/or lower its spending policy 
rate.
15. 
Determine whether 
the board should 
accept the CIO’s 
recommendation. 
(circle one) Justify your response.
     Accept The board should reject the CIO’s recommendation. This recom -
mendation is a significant departure from current practice and 
entails a much higher level of risk. The size of the investment team 
is small, with only four people, and it may not have adequate access 
to or experience in alternative investments. Given the relatively 
small size of the Endowment, it is unlikely that it has access to top 
managers in the hedge fund and private equity spaces.     Reject
16. 
Learning Module 5 Portfolio Management for Institutional Investors 408
        Discuss the features that Heselwith should consider in evalu -
ating the two plans with respect to the following:
Benefit Payments Heselwith notes that the vesting schedule with regard to the 
company’s contributions is the same in both plans, although her 
contributions in the DC plan are vested immediately.  
The DB plan provides a defined payment linked to final salary and 
years of service, whereas the DC plan provides an uncertain benefit 
based on Lyricul’s and Heselwith’s contributions as well as the 
investment performance of the plan assets.
Contributions Lyricul’s contribution rate to the DB plan is not known, but the 
plan is fully funded. However, there is no guarantee that it will 
remain fully funded or that Lyricul is committed to maintaining 
the DB plan’s fully funded status. The rate for the DC plan is stated 
to be 12% of annual salary.
Shortfall Risk Heselwith notes that the shortfall risk of plan assets being insuf -
ficient to meet her retirement benefit payments falls to her 
employer, Lyricul, with the DB plan. However, for the DC plan, the 
shortfall risk falls to her and depends on the 12% contribution rate 
from the company, plus any additional contributions she chooses 
to make, as well as the performance of the chosen investments.
Mortality/ Longevity 
RisksThe DB plan pools mortality risk such that those in the pool who 
die prematurely leave assets that help fund benefit payments for 
those who live longer than expected. Heselwith bears the risk of 
outliving her savings with the DC plan.
17. 
Determine whether the 
risk tolerance of the DB 
Plan is below average or 
above average. (circle 
one) Justify your response with two reasons.
Below Average• The plan is underfunded, and the discount rate being used is 
fairly aggressive.  
1. The DB plan already has a deficit, despite regular contribu -
tions, and is suffering from investment losses. The discount 
rate is already aggressive and should not be increased to lower 
the contribution.
• The uncertain financial condition of the company.  
2. The uncertain condition of Antiliaro may constrain its 
ability to make contributions to the DB plan. Lack of earnings 
growth and increasing debt on the balance sheet over the last 
few years imply below-average risk tolerance.
Solutions 409
Determine whether the 
risk tolerance of the DB 
Plan is below average or 
above average. (circle 
one) Justify your response with two reasons.
Above Average • The plan suffers from investment losses.  
3. Often, investment losses can lead a DB plan to take on 
more investment risk to achieve higher returns, but the other 
constraints, such as the plan’s underfunded status and the 
company’s financial condition, prevent this approach.
• The older age of employees necessitates liquidity.  
4. The average employee age is 50 years, and the company has 
many retirees because of its longevity. These characteristics 
generate a need for liquidity, which lowers the amount of risk 
the plan can assume.
• The high correlation between the operating results of 
Antiliaro and pension asset returns lowers the risk tolerance of 
the pension plan.  
5. The high correlation between the operating results of 
Antiliaro and the pension asset returns suggests a low risk tol -
erance. If Antiliaro is performing poorly as a company, this will 
constrain its ability to make additional contributions that may 
be necessary to address the shortfall in the pension’s funding.
18. The modified duration of the bank’s equity capital after restructuring is 9.89 
years:
    D  E  *   =    (    A _ E   )     D  A  *   −    (    A _ E   − 1 )     D  L  *    (    Δi _ Δy   )    
    =    (    1 _ 0.10   )     × 2.10 −    (    1 _ 0.10   − 1 )     × 1.90 × 0.65     
= 9.89 years   

Trading Costs and Electronic Markets
by Larry Harris, PhD, CFA.
Larry Harris, PhD, CFA, is at the USC Marshall School of Business (USA).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
explain the components of execution costs, including explicit and 
implicit costs
calculate and interpret effective spreads and VWAP transaction cost 
estimates
describe the implementation shortfall approach to transaction cost 
measurement
describe factors driving the development of electronic trading 
systems
describe market fragmentation
identify and contrast the types of electronic traders
describe characteristics and uses of electronic trading systems
describe comparative advantages of low-latency traders
describe the risks associated with electronic trading and how 
regulators mitigate them
describe abusive trading practices that real-time surveillance of 
markets may detectLEARNING MODULE
6
This reading draws from Trading 
and Electronic Markets: What 
Investment Professionals Need 
to Know,  by Larry Harris, PhD, 
CFA, Research Foundation of CFA 
Institute. © 2015 CFA Institute. 
All rights reserved.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 412
COSTS OF TRADING
explain the components of execution costs, including explicit and 
implicit costs
Securities research, portfolio management, and securities trading support the invest -
ment process. Of the three, trading is often the least understood and least appreciated 
function. Among the questions addressed in this reading are the following:
 ■What are explicit and implicit trading costs, and how are they measured?
 ■How is a limit order book interpreted?
 ■How have trading strategies adapted to market fragmentation?
 ■What types of electronic traders can be distinguished?
This reading is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the direct and indirect 
costs of trading.1 Section 3 discusses developments in electronic trading and the 
effects they had on transaction costs and market fragmentation. Section 4 identifies 
the most important types of electronic traders. Section 5 describes electronic trading 
facilities and some important ways traders use them. Section 6 discusses risks posed 
by electronic trading and how regulators control them. Finally, Section 7 summarizes 
the reading.
Costs of Trading
Understanding the costs of trading is critical for ensuring optimal execution and 
transaction cost management for portfolios. Because trading costs are a significant 
source of investment performance slippage, investment sponsors and their investment 
managers pay close attention to trading processes.
The costs of trading include fixed costs and variable costs. For buy-side institu -
tions, fixed trading costs include the costs of employing buy-side traders, the costs 
of equipping them with proper trading tools (electronic systems and data), and the 
costs of office space (trading rooms or corners). Small buy-side institutions often avoid 
these costs by not employing buy-side traders. Their portfolio managers submit their 
orders directly to their brokers. Variable transaction costs arise from trading activity 
and consist of explicit and implicit costs.
Explicit costs  are the direct costs of trading, such as broker commission costs, 
transaction taxes, stamp duties, and fees paid to exchanges. They are costs for which 
a trader could receive a receipt.
Implicit costs , by contrast, are indirect costs caused by the market impact of trading. 
Buyers often must raise prices to encourage sellers to trade with them, and sellers often 
must lower prices to encourage buyers. The price concessions that impatient traders 
make to complete their trades are called the market impacts of their trades. For small 
orders, market impact often is limited to buying at bid prices and selling at lower ask 
prices. Small market orders generally have small market impact because these orders 
often are immediately filled by traders willing to trade at quoted bid and offer prices, 
or even better prices. Larger orders have greater market impact when traders must 
move the market to fill their orders. In these cases, traders must accept larger price 
concessions (less attractive prices) to execute their orders in entirety. Although no 
receipt can be given for implicit costs, they are real nonetheless.
1 CFA Institute would like to thank Ananth Madhavan, PhD, at BlackRock (USA) for his contribution to 
this section, which includes material first written by him.1
Costs of Trading 413
Implicit costs result from the following issues:
 ■The bid–ask spread  is the ask price (the price at which a trader will sell a 
specified quantity of a security) minus the bid price (the price at which a 
trader will buy a specified quantity of a security). Traders who want to trade 
quickly buy at higher prices and sell at lower prices than those willing to 
wait for others to trade with them.
 ■Market impact  (or price impact) is the effect of the trade on transaction 
prices. Traders who want to fill large orders often must move prices to 
encourage others to trade with them.
 ■Delay costs  (also called slippage) arise from the inability to complete the 
desired trade immediately. Traders fail to profit when they fill their orders 
after prices move as they expect.
 ■Opportunity costs  (or unrealized profit/loss) arise from the failure to exe -
cute a trade promptly. Traders fail to profit when their orders fail to trade 
and price move as they expect.
Dealer Quotes
Dealers provide liquidity to other traders when they allow traders to buy and sell when 
those traders want to trade. Those traders may be the clients known to the dealers, 
or they may be unknown traders whose orders exchanges assign to standing dealer 
orders and quotes.
Unlike brokers, dealers trade for their accounts when filling their customers’ orders. 
When dealers buy or sell, they increase or reduce their inventories. Dealers profit by 
selling at ask prices that are higher than the bid prices at which they buy. If buying 
interest is greater than selling interest, dealers raise their ask prices to discourage 
buyers and raise their bid prices to encourage sellers. Likewise, if selling interest is 
greater than buying interest, dealers lower their ask prices to encourage buyers and 
lower their bid prices to discourage sellers.
Dealers help markets function well by being continuously available to take the 
other side of a trade when other traders want to trade. Dealers thus make markets 
more continuous. They are especially important in markets for infrequently traded 
securities in which buyers and sellers rarely are present at the same time. For example, 
most bond markets are overwhelmingly dealer markets because most bonds rarely 
trade. If an investor wants to sell a rarely traded bond, the investor might have a long 
wait before another investor interested in buying that bond arrives. Instead, a dealer 
generally will buy the bond and then try to market it to potential buyers. Practitioners 
say that dealers “make market” when they offer to trade.
Bid–Ask Spreads and Order Books
The prices at which dealers will buy or sell specified quantities of a security are, 
respectively, their bid prices  and ask prices . (Ask prices are also known as offer 
prices.) The excess of the ask price over the bid price is the dealer’s bid–ask spread .
When several dealers offer bid prices, the best bid  is the offer to buy with the 
highest bid price. The best bid is also known as the inside bid . The best ask , also 
known as the best offer  or inside ask , is the offer to sell with the lowest ask price.
The spread between the best bid price and the best ask price in a market is the 
market bid–ask spread, which is also known as the inside spread . It will be smaller 
(tighter or narrower) than the individual dealer spreads if the dealer with the highest 
bid price is not also the dealer with the lowest ask price.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 414
For example, suppose that a portfolio manager gives the firm’s trading desk an 
order to buy 1,000 shares of Economical Chemical Systems, Inc. (ECSI). Three deal -
ers (coded A, B, and C) make a market in those shares. When the trader views the 
market in ECSI at 10:22 a.m. on his computer screen, the three dealers have put in 
the following limit orders to trade at an exchange market:
 ■Dealer A: bid: 98.85 for 600 shares; ask: 100.51 for 1,000 shares
 ■Dealer B: bid: 98.84 for 500 shares; ask: 100.55 for 500 shares
 ■Dealer C: bid: 98.82 for 700 shares; ask: 100.49 for 200 shares
The bid–ask spreads of Dealers A, B, and C are, respectively,
 ■100.51 − 98.85 = 1.66
 ■100.55 − 98.84 = 1.71
 ■100.49 − 98.82 = 1.67
The best bid price, 98.85 by Dealer A, is lower than the best ask price, 100.49 by 
Dealer C. The market spread is thus 100.49 − 98.85 = 1.64, which is lower than any 
of the dealers’ spreads.
The trader might see the quote information organized on his screen as shown in 
Exhibit 1 . In this display, called a limit order book , the bids and asks are separately 
ordered from best to worst with the best at the top. The trader also notes that the 
midquote price  (halfway between the market bid and ask prices) is (100.49 + 98.85)/2 
= 99.67.
Exhibit 1: The Limit Order Book for Economical Chemical Systems, Inc.
Bids   Asks
Dealer Time Entered Price Size  Dealer Time Entered Price Size
A 10:21 a.m. 98.85 600  C 10:21 a.m. 100.49 200
B 10:21 a.m. 98.84 500  A 10:21 a.m. 100.51 1,000
C 10:19 a.m. 98.82 700  B 10:19 a.m. 100.55 500
Note:  The bids are ordered from highest to lowest, while the asks are ordered from lowest to highest. 
These orderings are from best bid or ask to worst bid or ask.
If the trader on the firm’s trading desk submits a market buy order for 1,000 shares, the 
trader would purchase 200 shares from Dealer C at 100.49 per share and 800 shares 
from Dealer A at 100.51 per share.
Note that filling the second part of the order cost the trader 0.02 per share more 
than the first part because Dealer C’s ask size was insufficient to fill the entire order. 
Large orders have price impact when they move down the book as they fill. The price 
impact of an order depends on its size and the available liquidity.
If this market were not an exchange market, the trader might choose to direct the 
buy order to a specific dealer—for example, to Dealer A. The trader may do so for 
many reasons. The trader may believe that Dealer A more likely will honor her quote 
than would Dealer C. Alternatively, the trader may believe that Dealer A more likely 
will settle the trade than Dealer C. Such considerations are especially important in 
markets for which no clearinghouse guarantees that all trades will settle—for example, 
most currency markets. Institutions active in such markets may screen counterparties 
on credit criteria. Finally, the trader might fear that Dealer A will cancel her quote 
when she (or a computer managing her quote) sees that a trade took place at 100.49. 
Sending the order first to Dealer A thus could produce a better average price.
Effective Spreads and Volume-Weighted Cost Estimates 415
Implicit Transaction Cost Estimates
Investment managers and traders measure transaction costs so that they can better 
predict the cost of filling orders and so that they can better manage the brokers and 
dealers who fill their orders. Buyers, of course, want to trade at low prices, while sellers 
want to trade at high prices. Expensive trades are purchases arranged at high prices 
or sales arranged at low prices.
To estimate transaction costs, analysts compare trade prices to a benchmark price. 
Commonly used price benchmarks include the midquote price at the time of the 
trade, the midquote price at the time of the order submission, and a volume-weighted 
average price around the time of the trade. These three benchmarks, respectively, 
correspond to the effective spread, implementation shortfall, and VWAP methods of 
transaction cost estimation.
EFFECTIVE SPREADS AND VOLUME-WEIGHTED COST 
ESTIMATES
calculate and interpret effective spreads and VWAP transaction cost 
estimates
describe the implementation shortfall approach to transaction cost 
measurement
The market spread is a measure of trade execution costs. It is how much traders would 
lose per quantity traded if they simultaneously submitted buy and sell market orders 
that respectively execute at the ask and bid prices. The loss is the cost of trading, 
because this strategy otherwise accomplishes nothing. Given that two trades generated 
the cost, the cost per trade is one half of the quoted spread.
The prices that traders receive when trading often differ from quoted prices. Smaller 
orders sometimes fill at better prices; larger orders often fill at worse prices. Standing 
orders offering liquidity fill at same-side prices (buy at bid, sell at ask), if they fill at all.
The effective spread provides a more general estimate of the cost of trading. It 
uses the midquote price (the average, or midpoint, of the bid and the ask prices at the 
time the order was entered) as the benchmark price:
   Effective spread transaction cost estimate  =
        Trade size  ×    {   Trade price  −    (    Bid + Ask _  2   )    
    
   (    Bid + Ask _  2   )     − Trade price       for buy orders
       for sell orders     
For a buy order filled at the ask, the estimated implicit cost of trading is half the 
bid–ask spread, because Ask − [(Bid + Ask)/2] = [(Ask − Bid)/2]. Multiplying this 
midquote price benchmark transaction cost estimate by 2 produces a statistic called 
the effective spread . It is the spread that traders would have observed if the quoted 
ask (for a purchase) or the bid (for a sale) were equal to the trade price.
The effective spread is a sensible estimate of transaction costs when orders are filled 
in single trades. If an order fills at a price better than the quoted price (e.g., a buy order 
fills at a price below the ask price), the order is said to receive price improvement  
and the spread is effectively lower. Price improvement occurs when trade execution 
prices are better than quoted prices. An order that fills at a price outside the quoted 
spread has an effective spread that is larger than the quoted spread. Such results occur 
when trade execution prices are worse than quoted prices.2
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 416
The effective spread is a poor estimate of transaction costs when traders split large 
orders into many parts to fill over time. Such orders often move the market and cause 
bid and ask prices to rise or fall. The impact of the order on market prices, called 
market impact , makes trading expensive—especially for the last parts to fill—but the 
effective spread will not fully identify this cost if it is computed separately for each trade.
For example, suppose that a buy order for 10,000 shares fills in two trades. The 
prices and sizes of these trades and the best bids and offers in the market when the 
trades occurred appear in the following table:
Trade Trade Price Trade Size Prevailing Bid Prevailing Offer
#1 10.21 4,000 10.19 10.21
#2 10.22 6,000 10.20 10.22
For this buy order, the effective spread transaction cost per share is 0.01, or [(10.21− 
10.19)/2] and [(10.22 − 10.20)/2], for both trades (the effective spreads are both 
0.02). Thus, the total transaction cost estimate measured using the midquote price 
benchmark is 100 = 0.01 × 10,000. This estimate is problematic because it reflects 
the higher price of the second trade, which was likely caused by the market impact 
of the trader’s first trade.
Effective spreads also do not measure delay costs  (also called slippage) that arise 
from the inability to complete the desired trade immediately because of its size in 
relation to the available market liquidity. Delay costs also arise when portfolio man -
agers or their traders fail to create and route orders quickly to the markets where they 
will fill most quickly. Analysts often measure delay costs on the portion of the order 
carried over from one day to the next. Delay is costly when price moves away from 
an order (up for a buy order, down for a sell order), often because information leaks 
into the market before or during the execution of the order.
When delays in execution cause a portion of the order to go unfilled, the asso -
ciated cost is called opportunity cost . For example, suppose a futures trader places 
an order to buy 10 contracts with a limit price of 99.00, good for one day, when the 
market quote is 99.01 to 99.04. The order does not execute, and the contract closes at 
99.80. If the order could have been filled at 99.04, the difference (99.80 − 99.04 = 0.76) 
reflects the opportunity cost per contract. By trading more aggressively, the trader 
might have avoided these costs. Opportunity costs are difficult to measure. In the 
example, the one-day time frame is arbitrary, and the assumption that the order could 
fill at 99.04 may be suspect. The estimate usually is sensitive to the time frame chosen 
for measurement and to assumptions about the prices at which orders could trade.
Implementation Shortfall
The implementation shortfall method of measuring trading costs addresses the 
problems associated with the effective spread method. Implementation shortfall is 
also attractive because it views trading from an investment management perspective 
and measures the total cost of implementing an investment decision by capturing all 
explicit and implicit costs. The implementation shortfall method includes the market 
impact costs and delay costs as well as opportunity costs, which are often significant 
for large orders.
Implementation shortfall compares the values of the actual portfolio with that of 
a paper portfolio constructed on the assumption that trades could be arranged at the 
prices that prevailed when the decision to trade is made. The prevailing price—also 
called the decision price, the arrival price, or the strike price—is generally taken to be 
the midquote price at the time of the trade decision. The excess of the paper value over 
the actual value is the implementation shortfall . The coverage of implementation 
shortfall is continued at Level III.
Effective Spreads and Volume-Weighted Cost Estimates 417
VWAP Transaction Cost Estimates
Volume-weighted average price (VWAP) is one of the most widely used benchmark 
prices that analysts use to estimate transaction costs. Analysts typically compute the 
VWAP using all trades that occurred from the start of the order until the order was 
completed, a measure that is often referred to as “interval VWAP . ” The VWAP is the 
sum of the total dollar value of the benchmark trades divided by the total quantity of 
the trades. The VWAP transaction cost estimate formula is as follows:
   VWAP transaction cost estimate  =
       Trade size  ×    {   Trade VWAP  − VWAP benchmark    VWAP   benchmark  − Trade VWAP       for buy orders   for sell orders    
The VWAP transaction cost estimate is popular in part because it is easy to interpret. 
It answers this question: Did you get a better or worse average price than all traders 
trading when you were trading?
Interpreting VWAP transaction cost estimates is problematic when the trades being 
evaluated are a substantial fraction of all trades in the VWAP benchmark, or, more 
generally, when the trades took place at the same rate as other trades in the market. In 
both cases, the Trade VWAP and the VWAP benchmark will be nearly equal, which 
would suggest that the evaluated trades were not costly. But this conclusion would 
be misleading if the trade had substantial price impact. For example, if a large trader 
were the only buyer for a given trading period (or interval), the VWAP transaction 
cost estimate would be zero regardless of the market impact.
This bias toward zero helps explain why the measure is so popular. Investment 
managers like to show their investment sponsors transaction cost estimates that 
suggest that trading is not expensive.
EXAMPLE 1
Transaction Cost Analyses for an Illiquid Stock
Arapahoe Tanager, portfolio manager of a Canadian small-cap equity mutual 
fund, and his firm’s chief trader, Lief Schrader, are reviewing the execution of 
a ticket to sell 12,000 shares of Alpha Company, limit C$9.95. The order was 
traded over the day.
Schrader split the ticket into three orders that executed that day as follows:
A. A market order to sell 2,000 shares executed at a price of C$10.15. 
Upon order submission, the market was C$10.12 bid for 3,000 shares, 
2,000 shares offered at C$10.24.
B. A market order to sell 3,000 shares executed at a price of C$10.11. 
Upon order submission, the market was C$10.11 bid for 3,000 shares, 
2,000 shares offered at C$10.22.
C. Toward the end of the trading day, Schrader submitted an order to 
sell the remaining 7,000 shares, limit C$9.95. The order executed in 
part, with 5,000 shares trading at an average price of C$10.01. Upon 
order submission, the market was C$10.05 bid for 3,000 shares, 2,000 
shares offered at C$10.19. This order exceeded the quoted bid size 
and “walked down” the limit order book (i.e., after the market bid was 
filled, the order continued to sell at lower prices). After the market 
closed, Schrader allowed the order to cancel. Tanager did want to sell 
the 2,000 unfilled shares on the next trading day.
Only two other trades in Alpha Company occurred on this day: 2,000 shares 
at C$10.20 and 1,000 shares at C$10.15. The last trade price of the day was 
C$9.95; it was C$9.50 on the following day.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 418
1. For each of the three fund trades, compute the quoted spread. Also, com -
pute the average quoted spreads prevailing at the times of each trade.
Solution:
The quoted spread is the difference between the ask and bid prices. For 
the first order, the quoted spread is C$10.24 − C$10.12 = C$0.12. Similarly, 
the quoted spreads for the second and third orders are C$0.11 and C$0.14, 
respectively. The average quoted spread is (C$0.12 + C$0.11 + C$0.14)/3 = 
C$0.1233.
2. For each of the three fund trades, compute the effective spread (use the 
average fill price for the third trade). Also, compute the average effective 
spread.
Solution:
The effective spread for a sell order is 2 × (Midpoint of the market at the 
time of order entry − Trade price). For the first order, the midpoint of the 
market at the time of order entry is (C$10.12 + C$10.24)/2 = C$10.18, so 
that the effective spread is 2 × (C$10.18 − C$10.15) = C$0.06.
The effective spread for the second order is 2 × [(C$10.11 + C$10.22)/2 − 
C$10.11] = C$0.11.
The effective spread for the third order is 2 × [(C$10.05 + C$10.19)/2 − 
C$10.01] = C$0.22.
The average effective spread is (C$0.06 + C$0.11 + C$0.22)/3 = C$0.13.
3. Explain the relative magnitudes of quoted and effective spreads for each of 
the three fund trades.
Solution:
The first trade received price improvement because the shares sold at a price 
above the bid price. Therefore, the effective spread is less than the quoted 
spread. No price improvement occurred for the second trade because the 
shares sold at the bid price. Also, the second trade had no price impact 
beyond trading at the bid; the entire order traded at the quoted bid. Accord -
ingly, the effective and quoted spreads are equal. The effective spread for the 
third trade is greater than the quoted spread because the large order size, 
which was greater than the bid size, caused the order to walk down the limit 
order book. The average sale price was less than the bid so that the effective 
spread was higher than the quoted spread.
4. Calculate the VWAP for all 13,000 Alpha Company shares that traded that 
day and for the 10,000 shares sold by the mutual fund. Compute the VWAP 
transaction cost estimate for the 10,000 shares sold.
Solution:
The VWAP for the day is the total dollar volume divided by the total number 
of shares traded. The dollar volume is 2,000 shares × C$10.15 + 3,000 shares 
× C$10.11 + 5,000 shares × C$10.01 + 2,000 shares × C$10.20 + 1,000 shares 
at C$10.15 = C$131,230. Dividing this by the 13,000-share total volume 
gives a VWAP of C$10.0946. A similar calculation using only the sales made 
by the mutual fund gives a trade VWAP of C$10.0680. The VWAP trans -
action cost estimate for the sale is the difference multiplied by the 10,000 
Development of Electronic Markets 419
shares sold: C$266.15 = 10,000 shares × (C$10.0946 − C$10.0680) [differ -
ences due to rounding].
DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRONIC MARKETS
describe factors driving the development of electronic trading 
systems
describe market fragmentation
The application of new information technologies to trading processes produced radical 
changes in how investment managers trade. Automated trading systems and trading 
strategies replaced manual processes. New electronic exchanges, alternative trading 
systems, electronic traders, and securities dramatically changed trading in most 
markets. The resulting efficiencies generally improved market quality, but electronic 
trading also produced new regulatory concerns. High levels of fragmentation and 
electronification now characterize most global trading markets.
Electronic Trading
Trading at organized exchanges now depends critically on automated electronic 
systems used both by exchanges and by their trader clients. The exchanges use elec -
tronic systems to arrange trades by matching orders submitted by buyers with those 
submitted by sellers. Traders use electronic systems to generate the orders that the 
exchanges process. The most important electronic traders are dealers, arbitrageurs, 
and buy-side institutional traders who use algorithmic trading tools provided by their 
brokers to fill their large orders.
The two types of systems are co-dependent: Traders need high-speed order pro -
cessing and communication systems to implement their electronic trading strategies, 
and the exchanges need electronic exchange systems to process the vast numbers of 
orders that these electronic traders produce. The adoption of electronic exchange 
systems led to huge growth in automated order creation and submission systems.
The widespread use of electronic trading systems significantly decreased trading 
costs for buy-side traders. Costs fell as exchanges obtained greater cost efficiencies 
from using electronic matching systems instead of floor-based, manual trading systems. 
These technologies also decreased costs and increased efficiencies for the dealers and 
arbitrageurs, who provide much of the liquidity offered at exchanges. Competition 
forced them to pass along many of the benefits of their new technologies to buy-side 
traders in the form of narrower spreads quoted for larger sizes. New electronic 
buy-side order management systems also decreased buy-side trading costs by allowing 
a smaller number of buy-side traders to process more orders and to process them 
more efficiently than manual traders.3
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 420
Advantages of Electronic Trading Systems
Compared with floor-based trading systems, electronic order-matching systems enjoy 
many advantages:
 ■Most obviously, electronic systems are cheap to operate once built. 
Operating in server rooms, they require less physical space than trading 
floors. Also, in contrast to floor-based trading systems, electronic trading 
systems do not require exchange officials to record and report prices.
 ■Electronic exchange systems do exactly what they are programmed to do. 
When properly programmed, they precisely enforce the exchange’s trading 
order precedence and pricing rules without error or exception.
 ■Electronic exchange systems can also keep perfect audit trails so that foren -
sic investigators can determine the exact sequence and timing of events that 
may interest them.
 ■Electronic exchange systems that support hidden orders keep those orders 
perfectly hidden. Unlike floor brokers, they never inadvertently or fraudu -
lently reveal their clients’ hidden orders to others.
 ■In contrast to floor-based brokers and exchange officials, electronic 
order-matching systems can operate, for the most part, on a continuous, 
“around-the-clock” basis.
 ■Finally, electronic exchanges can operate when bad weather or other events 
would likely prevent workers from convening on a floor.
These efficiencies led to great growth. Electronic trading systems have largely dis -
placed floor-based trading systems in all instruments for which order-driven markets 
are viable. Order-driven markets—markets in which orders submitted by traders are 
arranged based on a rules-based, order-matching system run by an exchange, a broker, 
or an alternative trading system (ATS)—are now organized by most exchanges and 
electronic communication networks (ECNs).
Additionally, computers have come to dominate the implementation of many 
trading strategies because they are so efficient and so unlike human traders:
 ■Computers have infinite attention spans and a very wide attention scope. 
They can continuously watch and respond to information from many instru -
ments and many markets simultaneously and essentially forever.
 ■Their responses are extraordinarily fast.
 ■Computers are perfectly disciplined and do only what they are instructed 
(programmed) to do.
 ■Computers do not forget any information that their programmers want to 
save.
Electronification of Bond Markets
The electronic market structures of equity, futures, and options markets have attracted 
tremendous attention throughout the world. Much less attention has been given to the 
market structures of corporate and municipal bond markets, most of which, from the 
customer’s point of view, have changed little since the late 19th century. Despite the 
efforts of many creative developers of electronic bond trading systems, most public 
investors in these markets still trade largely over the counter with dealers. The potential 
for electronic trading systems in these markets—and the attendant growth in electronic 
trading strategies—is quite large. Such systems undoubtedly will reflect the fact that 
Development of Electronic Markets 421
bond issues—especially municipal bonds—vastly outnumber stock issues. Accordingly, 
except for the most actively traded bonds, limit order book trading systems will not 
be successful because buyers and sellers rarely will be present at the same time.
However, systems can be built that would allow public investors to trade with each 
other when both sides are present in the market. These systems would provide order 
display facilities, where public investors and proprietary traders could post limit orders 
so that all traders could see them. Like marketable orders, limit orders seek to obtain 
the best price immediately available; additionally, they instruct not to accept a price 
higher than a specified limit price when buying or a price lower than a specified limit 
price when selling. If these facilities also had automatic execution mechanisms and 
regulations or legal decisions to prevent dealers from trading through displayed orders 
when arranging their trades, bond transaction costs would drop substantially and bond 
trading would become much more active. Many such electronic bond order-matching 
systems already exist, but they primarily serve dealers and not public investors. Recent 
empirical research suggests that public investors would greatly benefit if their brokers 
provided them with direct access to these systems as they presently do in the equity 
markets. Instead, most broker/dealers commonly interpose themselves.
Market Fragmentation
Markets for many asset classes have become increasingly fragmented throughout the 
world because venues trading the same instruments have proliferated and trading in 
any given instrument now occurs in multiple venues. Available liquidity for an instru -
ment on any one exchange now often represents just a small fraction of the aggregate 
liquidity for that instrument. Market fragmentation —trading the same instrument 
in multiple venues—increases the potential for price and liquidity disparities across 
venues because buyers and sellers often are not in the same venues at the same time.
For example, in the United States, order flow in exchange-listed equities is now 
divided among 11 exchanges, 40 alternative trading systems, and numerous dealers. In 
the late 20th century, however, trading mainly occurred on three primary exchanges, 
a few minor regional exchanges, and in the offices of some large institutional broker/
dealers. Alternative trading systems (ATSs), also known as electronic communication 
networks (ECNs) or multilateral trading facilities (MTFs), are increasingly important 
trading venues. They function like exchanges but do not exercise regulatory authority 
over their subscribers except concerning the conduct of their trading in their trading 
systems.
With increasing market fragmentation, traders filling large orders now adapt 
their trading strategies to search for liquidity across multiple venues and across time 
to control the market impacts of their trades. Electronic algorithmic trading tech -
niques, such as liquidity aggregation and smart order routing, help traders manage 
the challenges and opportunities presented by fragmentation. Liquidity aggregators 
create “super books” that present liquidity across markets for a given instrument. 
These tools offer global views of market depth (available liquidity) for each instrument 
regardless of which trading venue offers the liquidity. For example, the best bid, or 
highest price a buyer is willing to pay, for a Eurodollar future may be on the Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange (CME) and the second best on ELX Markets, a fully electronic 
futures exchange. Smart order-routing algorithms send orders to the markets that 
display the best-quoted prices and sizes.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 422
Effects on Transaction Costs
Numerous studies show that transaction costs declined with the growth of electronic 
trading over time. Some studies also show that at a given point in time, lower transac -
tion costs are found in those markets with the greatest intensity of electronic trading. 
These time-series and cross-sectional results are not surprising. They result from the 
greater cost efficiencies associated with electronic trading.
With the growth of electronic trading, bid–ask spreads decreased substantially. 
These decreases lowered transaction costs for retail traders and institutions trading 
small orders.
Overall transaction costs also decreased for large orders, many of which are now 
broken into smaller parts for execution. A study of the execution costs of tens of thou -
sands of equity orders for US stocks involving tens of millions of dollars of principal 
value shows that the implementation shortfall cost of filling those orders dropped with 
the growth of electronic trading. This evidence suggests that any profits obtained by 
parasitic traders from front running orders are smaller than the cost savings obtained 
by buy-side traders from trading in electronic markets using algorithms.
TYPES OF ELECTRONIC TRADERS
identify and contrast the types of electronic traders
The proliferation of electronic exchange trading systems has led to the adoption of 
electronic trading by proprietary traders, buy-side traders, and the electronic brokers 
that serve them. Proprietary traders include dealers, arbitrageurs, and various types 
of front runners—all of whom are profit-motivated traders. In contrast, buy-side 
traders trade to fill orders for investment and risk managers who use the markets to 
establish positions from which they derive various utilitarian and profit-motivated 
benefits. Electronic brokers serve both types of traders.
Electronic traders differ in how they send orders to markets. Those proprietary 
traders who are registered as broker/dealers usually send their orders directly to 
exchanges. Those who are not broker/dealers must send their orders to brokers, who 
then forward them to exchanges. These brokers are said to provide sponsored access 
to their proprietary electronic trader clients. Brokers who provide sponsored access 
have very fast electronic order processing systems that allow them to forward orders 
to exchanges as quickly as possible while still undertaking the regulatory functions 
necessary to protect the markets and themselves from various financial and operational 
risks associated with brokering orders for proprietary electronic traders.
Electronic trading strategies are most profitable or effective when they can act on 
new information quickly. Accordingly, proprietary traders and electronic brokers build 
automated trading systems that are extremely fast. These systems often can receive 
information of interest to the trader, process it, and place a trading instruction at an 
exchange in less than a few milliseconds—and sometimes much faster.
The events that interest electronic traders include:
 ■trade reports and quote changes in the securities or contracts that they 
trade;
 ■similar data for instruments that are correlated with the securities or con -
tracts that they trade;4
Types of Electronic Traders 423
 ■indexes that summarize these data across markets and for various instru -
ment classes;
 ■changes in limit order books; and
 ■news releases from companies, governments, and other producers and 
aggregators of information.
Electronic traders typically receive information about these events via high-speed 
electronic data feeds. Not all electronic traders analyze all these different information 
sources, but many do.
Electronic proprietary traders include high-frequency traders and low-latency 
traders. High-frequency and low-latency (i.e., extremely fast) traders must often trade 
very quickly in response to new information to be profitable. They are distinguished 
by how often they trade.
High-frequency traders (HFTs)  generally complete round trips composed of a 
purchase followed by a sale (or a sale followed by a purchase) within a minute and 
often as quickly as a few milliseconds. During a day, they may trade in and out of an 
actively traded security or contract more than a thousand times—but usually only 
in small sizes.
Low-latency traders  include news traders who trade on electronic news feeds and 
certain parasitic traders. Parasitic traders are speculators who base their predictions 
about future prices on information they obtain about orders that other traders intend, 
or will soon intend, to fill. Parasitic traders include front runners, who trade in front 
of traders who demand liquidity, and quote matchers, who trade in front of traders 
who supply liquidity. When trying to open or close positions, low-latency traders 
often need to send or cancel orders very quickly in response to new information. In 
contrast to HFTs, low-latency traders may hold their positions for as long as a day 
and sometimes longer.
The distinction between HFTs and low-latency traders is relatively new. Many 
commentators do not make any distinction, calling all electronic traders who need 
to trade quickly HFTs.
The Major Types of Electronic Traders
Electronic news traders  subscribe to high-speed electronic news feeds that report news 
releases made by corporations, governments, and other aggregators of information. 
They then quickly analyze these releases to determine whether the information they 
contain will move the markets and, if so, in which direction. They trade on this infor -
mation by sending marketable orders—instructions to fill the order at the best available 
price—to wherever they expect they may be filled. News traders profit when they 
can execute against stale orders—orders that do not yet reflect the new information.
For example, stock prices usually rise when a company announces earnings of 25 
pence a share when the consensus forecast is only 10 pence. Electronic news traders 
who receive the initial press release will use their computers to parse the text of the 
release to find the earnings number. The computers then will compare that number 
with the consensus forecast, which they have stored in their memory rather than on 
disk to reduce access time. If the 15 pence difference is sufficiently large, news trad -
ers may send one or more marketable buy orders to exchanges for execution. News 
traders must be very quick to ensure that they get to the market before others do. If 
they are too late, the price may have changed already or liquidity suppliers may have 
canceled their quotes.
Some news traders also process news releases that do not contain quantitative data. 
Using natural language-processing techniques, they try to identify the importance of 
the information for market valuations. For example, a report stating that “our main 
pesticide plant shut down because of the accidental release of poisonous chemicals” 
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 424
might be marked as having strong negative implications for values. Electronic news 
traders would sell on this information. If they are correct, the market will drop as 
other, slower traders read, interpret, and act on the information. If they are wrong, the 
market will not react to the information. In that case, news traders will reverse their 
position and lose the transaction costs associated with their round-trip trades. (Note 
that these transaction costs could be high if many news traders made the same wrong 
inference.) Because round-trip transaction costs usually are lower than the profits 
that electronic news traders can occasionally make when significant news arrives, 
news traders often may trade with the expectation of being right only occasionally.
Electronic dealers , like all dealers, make markets by placing bids (prices at which 
they are willing to buy) and offers (prices at which they are willing to sell) with the 
expectation that they can profit from round trips at favorable net spreads. Those who 
trade at the highest frequencies tend to be very wary. On the first indication that prices 
may move against their inventory positions (i.e., price decreases if they are long or 
own the asset; price increases if they are short or sold an asset they do not own), they 
immediately take liquidity by executing on the opposite side to reduce their exposure. 
They generally will not hold large inventory positions in actively traded stocks. As 
soon as they reach their inventory limit on one side of the market or the other, they 
cease bidding or offering on that side. Electronic dealers often monitor electronic 
news feeds. They may immediately cancel all their orders in any security mentioned 
in a news report. If the news is material, they do not want to offer liquidity to news 
traders to whom they would lose. If the news is immaterial, they merely lose whatever 
opportunity to trade may have come their way while out of the market.
Electronic dealers, like all other dealers, also keep track of scheduled news releases. 
They cancel their orders just before releases to avoid offering liquidity to traders who 
can act faster than they can. They also may try to reduce their inventories before a 
scheduled release to avoid holding a risky position.
Electronic arbitrageurs  look across markets for arbitrage opportunities in which 
they can buy an undervalued instrument and sell a similar overvalued one. The 
combination of these two positions is called an arbitrage portfolio, and the positions 
are called legs. Electronic arbitrageurs try to construct their arbitrage portfolios at 
minimum cost and risk.
Electronic front runners  are low-latency traders who use artificial intelligence meth -
ods to identify when large traders, or many small traders, are trying to fill orders on 
the same side of the market. They will purchase when they believe that an imbalance 
of buy orders over sell orders will push the market up and sell when they believe the 
opposite. Their order anticipation strategies try to identify predictable patterns in 
order submission. They may search for patterns in order submissions, trades, or the 
relations between trades and other events.
In most jurisdictions, dealers and brokers cannot legally front run orders that their 
clients have submitted. These orders include large orders that they know their clients 
are breaking up to fill in small pieces. But dealers and brokers can study records of 
their clients’ past orders to identify patterns in their behavior that would allow them 
to predict orders not yet submitted.
Some front runners also look for patterns in executed trades. For example, suppose 
that a trader sees that trades of a given size have been occurring at the offer every 10 
minutes for an hour. If the trader has seen this pattern of trading before, the trader 
may suspect that the activity will continue. If so, the trader may buy on the assumption 
that a trader is in the market filling a large buy order by breaking it into smaller pieces.
Buy-side traders, and the brokers who provide them with algorithms to manage 
large orders, are aware of the efforts that electronic traders make to detect and front 
run their orders. Accordingly, they randomize their strategies to make them more 
difficult to detect. They submit orders at random times instead of at regular intervals, 
and they submit various sizes instead of the same size. Although these techniques make 
Electronic Trading System: Characteristics and Uses 425
detection more difficult, hiding large, liquidity-demanding trades is always challenging 
because sophisticated traders can ultimately identify them by the inevitable relation 
between prices and volumes that they create. Electronic front runners look for these 
patterns, often using very advanced, automated data-mining tools.
Finally, some front runners examine the relation between trades and other events 
to predict future trades. Traders who identify these events quickly may be able to 
profit by buying ahead of retail or institutional traders. Because many traders initiate 
trades in response to common stimuli or in response to predictable situations, trad -
ers who can identify patterns in the relations between trades and events may profit 
from trading ahead. When the time between the stimulus and the response is short, 
electronic traders have a clear advantage.
Electronic quote matchers  try to exploit the option values of standing orders. 
Standing orders are limit orders waiting to be filled. Options to trade are valuable to 
quote matchers because they allow them to take positions with potentially limited 
losses. Quote matchers buy when they believe they can rely on standing buy orders 
to get out of their positions, and they sell when they can do the same with standing 
sell orders. Traders say that quote matchers lean on these orders. If prices then move 
in the quote matchers’ favor, they profit for as long as they stay in the security or 
contract. But if the quote matchers conclude that prices are moving against them, 
they immediately try to exit by trading with the standing orders and thereby limiting 
their losses.
For example, a fast quote matcher may buy when a slow trader is bidding at 20. 
If the price subsequently rises, the quote matcher will profit. If the quote matcher 
believes that the price will fall, the quote matcher will sell the position to the buyer at 
20 and thereby limit his losses. The main risk of the quote-matching strategy is that 
the standing order may be unavailable when the quote matcher needs it. Standing 
orders disappear when filled by another trader or when canceled.
Most large buy-side traders use electronic order management systems (OMSs) 
to manage their trading. These systems keep track of the orders that their portfolio 
managers want to be filled, which orders have been sent out to be filled, and which 
fills have been obtained. Buy-side OMSs generally allow the buy-side trader to route 
orders to brokers for further handling, along with instructions for how the orders 
should be handled. These entities may include exchanges, brokers, dealers, and var -
ious alternative trading systems. The OMSs typically have dashboards that allow the 
buy-side trader to see summaries of all activity of interest so that the trader can better 
manage the trading process. Finally, the OMSs help the buy-side traders report and 
confirm the trades to all interested parties.
Buy-side traders often employ electronic brokers to arrange their trades. In addition 
to supporting standard order instructions, such as limit or market orders, these bro -
kers often provide a full suite of advanced orders, trading tactics, and algorithms. The 
broker’s electronic trading system generally manages these advanced orders, tactics, 
and algorithms, but in some cases, exchange computers may perform these functions.
ELECTRONIC TRADING SYSTEM: CHARACTERISTICS 
AND USES
describe characteristics and uses of electronic trading systems
describe comparative advantages of low-latency traders5
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 426
Traders value speed because it allows them to act before other traders can act. This 
section identifies the three situations where speed is valuable, how exchanges and 
traders build and use fast trading systems, and some select examples of how electronic 
trading changed trading strategies.
Why Speed Matters
Electronic traders must be fast to trade effectively, regardless of whether they are 
proprietary traders or buy-side traders. Electronic traders have three needs for speed:
1. Taking . Electronic traders sometimes want to take a trading opportunity 
before others do. A new trading opportunity may attract many traders, 
and an existing trading opportunity may attract many traders when market 
events cause it to become more valuable (e.g., a standing limit order to sell 
becomes much more attractive when the prices of correlated securities rise). 
Often only the first trader to reach the attractive opportunity will bene -
fit. Thus, electronic traders must be fast so they can beat other traders to 
attractive trading opportunities.
2. Making . Market events often create attractive opportunities to offer 
liquidity. For example, at most exchanges when prices rise, the first traders 
to place bids at improved prices acquire time precedence at those prices 
that may allow them to trade sooner or at better prices than they otherwise 
would be able to trade. Therefore, electronic traders must be fast so they can 
acquire priority when they want it and before other traders do.
3. Canceling . Frequently, traders must quickly cancel orders they no longer 
want to fill, often because market events have increased the option values 
of those orders. For example, if traders have limit buy orders standing at the 
best bid and large trades take place at other exchanges at the same price, 
these traders may reasonably conclude that prices may drop and that they 
may obtain better executions at a lower price. They must cancel their orders 
as quickly as possible to reduce the probability that they will trade.
Note that electronic traders do not simply need to be fast to trade effectively: 
They must be faster than their competitors. Little inherent value comes from being 
fast; the value lies in being faster. The reason electronic trading systems have such 
low latencies (i.e., are extremely fast) is because electronic traders have been trying 
for years to be faster than their competitors.
Electronic order-handling systems used by exchanges also have grown faster as 
exchanges compete for order flows from electronic traders. Electronic traders often 
will not send orders to exchanges where they cannot quickly cancel them, especially 
if other exchanges have faster trading systems. Accordingly, exchanges with slow 
order-handling systems have lost market share.
Latency  is the elapsed time between the occurrence of an event and a subsequent 
action that depends on that event. For example, the event might be a trade at one 
exchange, and the action might be the receipt by another exchange of an instruction 
to cancel a standing order that a trader has sent upon learning of the trade. Electronic 
traders measure these latencies in milliseconds or microseconds (millionths of a 
second).
The latency of a linear multi-step process is the sum of the latencies of each step 
in the process. The submission of an order instruction by a trader in response to an 
event consists of three major steps, each of which involves many smaller steps beyond 
the scope of this discussion:
1. The trader must learn that the event took place.
Electronic Trading System: Characteristics and Uses 427
2. The trader must respond to the new information with a new order 
instruction.
3. The trader must send, and the exchange must receive, the new instruction.
Traders must use very fast communication systems to minimize the latencies 
associated with steps 1 and 3 (communicating in and out), and they must use very 
fast computer systems to minimize the latency associated with step 2 (responding).
Fast Communications
Electronic traders and brokers use several strategies to minimize their communication 
times. These strategies involve minimizing communication distances and maximizing 
line speeds. Note that the relevant measure of communication distance is the total 
of two distances that signals must travel. The first distance is from where the event 
is reported (often an exchange but sometimes another type of news source) to the 
computer that will process the information. The second distance is from the computer 
to the exchange trading system where the trader wants to deliver an order instruction.
Electronic traders and brokers locate their computers as close as possible to the 
exchanges at which they trade to minimize latencies resulting from physics: No mes -
sage can travel faster than the speed of light. At 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) 
per second in a vacuum, light travels 300 kilometers in a millisecond. Although the 
speed of light is incredibly fast, a fast computer with a clock speed of 5 GHz (billion 
cycles per second) can do 5 million operations in a millisecond—which often is more 
than required to receive information, process it, and send out an order instruction 
in response.
Communication latencies are particularly important when messages must travel 
significant distances. For example, the great circle (shortest) distances between Chicago 
and New York and between New York and London are, respectively, 1,146 kilometers 
and 5,576 kilometers. Thus, round-trip communications between these two pairs of 
cities have minimum latencies of approximately 8 and 37 milliseconds simply because 
of the speed of light. (The actual minimum latencies are longer because the speed of 
light in standard optical fiber is 31% slower than the speed of light in a vacuum.) Such 
delays illustrate that no electronic trader located at any significant distance from where 
information is created or must be delivered can effectively compete with traders who 
have minimized these combined distances.
Many exchanges allow electronic traders to place their servers in the rooms 
where the exchange servers operate, a practice called collocation. Exchanges charge 
substantial fees for collocation space and related services, such as air conditioning 
and power. Note that even within collocation centers, concerns about fairness dictate 
that the communication lines connecting proprietary servers to exchange servers all 
be of the same length for all customers buying the same class of collocation service.
Electronic traders and brokers also use the fastest communication technologies they 
can obtain to collect and transmit information when any distance separates the places 
where information events occur from the places where they act on those events. To 
that end, they use the fastest and most direct communication lines that are available. 
For example, they prefer line-of-sight microwave channels to fiber-optic and copper 
channels because of the differences in speed of electromagnetic wave propagation 
through these materials. (Microwaves travel through air at just slightly below the 
speed of light, whereas signals travel through fiber-optic channels and copper wires 
only two-thirds as quickly.) They also ensure that their communications pass through 
the fewest electronic routers and switches possible because passage through each of 
these devices adds its latency to the total latency of the line.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 428
Finally, electronic traders and brokers subscribe to special high-speed data feeds 
directly from exchanges and other data vendors. The vendors charge premium 
prices for these services, which are delivered over very high-speed communication 
lines. Some exchanges provide multiple classes of data services that vary by speed to 
price-discriminate among their clients.
Fast Computations
Once electronic traders receive information about an event of interest, they must decide 
whether to act on that information and how. Those traders who can make decisions 
faster than their competitors will trade more profitably. Electronic traders minimize 
the latencies associated with their decision making by using several strategies.
First and most obviously, they use very fast computers. They overclock their 
processors (i.e., run them faster than the processor designers intended) and use 
liquid cooling systems to keep them from melting. They store all information in fast 
memory to avoid the latencies associated with physical disk drives, which cannot 
deliver information while their heads are seeking the right track and can only deliver 
information as fast as their disks spin once the right track is found. They sometimes 
use specialized processors designed to solve their specific trading problems quickly, 
and they may even use processors etched on gallium arsenide rather than silicon.
Electronic traders also must run very efficient software. They often use simple and 
specialized operating systems to avoid the overhead associated with supporting oper -
ating system functions they do not use. Remarkably, many electronic trading systems 
run under variants of the original MS-DOS operating system because of its simplicity.
Electronic traders optimize their computer code for speed. They often write 
important functions that they repeatedly use in assembler language to ensure that they 
run quickly. (Code written in high-level languages, such as C++, tends to be slower 
because their compilers are designed to handle all types of code, not just code written 
to solve trading problems.) And they avoid using such languages as Python because 
they are interpreter languages that compile (create executable machine code) as they 
run, rather than compiling only once when first written.
Some electronic trading problems change so frequently that speed of coding is 
more important than speed of execution. For example, some problems depend on 
ever-changing sets of conditions or exceptions that present or constrain profit opportu -
nities. For such problems, traders use high-level languages (e.g., Python), because they 
can code faster and more accurately in these languages than in lower-level languages, 
such as C++. If they expect that the software will remain useful, they may later recode 
their routines in other languages to make them run faster.
Some electronic traders also reduce latency by creating contingency tables that 
contain prearranged action plans. For example, suppose that a bid rises in a market 
in which electronic traders are active. In response to the increased bid, traders may 
want to raise their bids or offers. The decision to do so may depend on their inventory 
positions and perhaps on many other factors as well. To decide what to do follow -
ing an increased bid may require substantial analyses, which take time. Traders can 
reduce their decision latencies by doing these analyses before the bid increases instead 
of afterward. Seeing the increased bid, they can respond by simply looking up the 
optimal response in a contingency table stored in memory. To be most useful, the 
contingency tables must be kept up to date and must include responses for most-likely 
events. In this example, traders presumably would also have precomputed responses 
for a decrease in the bid, among many other contingencies.
Electronic Trading System: Characteristics and Uses 429
EXAMPLE 2
Latency
1. Explain why low-latency is important to electronic traders.
Solution:
Electronic traders need a comparative speed advantage to 1) take advantage 
of market opportunities before others do, 2) receive time precedence that 
would allow them to trade sooner when offering liquidity to others, and 3) 
ensure order cancellation when they no longer want to fill the order. To gain 
a comparative advantage relative to others, electronic traders try to mini -
mize latency—the time between an event occurring and a subsequent ac -
tion, typically the submission of an order instruction, based upon that event. 
To minimize latency, electronic traders invest in very fast communication 
systems and very fast computer systems.
Advanced Orders, Tactics, and Algorithms
Buy-side traders often use electronic brokers and their systems for advanced orders, 
trading tactics, and algorithms provided by their electronic brokers to search for 
liquidity.
Advanced order types.
Advanced orders generally are limit orders with limit prices that change as market con -
ditions change. An example would be a pegged limit order for which the trader would 
like to maintain a bid or an offer at a specified distance relative to some benchmark. 
Suppose that a trader wants to peg a limit buy order two ticks below the current ask. 
A broker who supports this instruction may forward it to an exchange that supports 
the instruction if the probability of the order’s filling at that exchange is favorable 
compared with other exchanges. When the ask rises or falls, the exchange system will 
immediately cancel the order and replace it with a new limit order to keep the order 
at two ticks below the current ask.  If the exchange does not support this instruction, 
the broker’s computer will manage the order by submitting a limit order priced two 
ticks below the current ask and adjusting it as necessary to maintain the peg when the 
market moves. Effective management of a pegged limit order requires an electronic 
trading system with very low latency. If the order is not adjusted quickly enough, it 
risks being executed at an unfavorable price (in this example, if prices drop) or being 
resubmitted after other orders have been placed at the new price so the probability 
of execution at that price will be lower (if prices rise). Traders sometimes call pegged 
limit orders floating limit orders.
Trading tactics.
A trading tactic is a plan for executing a simple function that generally involves the 
submission of multiple orders. Note that the distinction between advanced orders 
and tactics can be arbitrary, and not all traders will use the same language to describe 
various trading functions. An example of a trading tactic is an instruction to sweep 
through every market at a given price to find hidden trading opportunities.
Suppose that the best exposed bid among all trading venues is 20.00 and the 
best exposed offer is 20.02. Because many trading systems permit traders to hide 
their orders, hidden buyers or sellers may be willing to trade at the 20.01 midpoint. 
Depending on the exchange, at least three types of orders could permit a trade at the 
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 430
midpoint. First, among exchanges that permit hidden orders, one or more exchanges 
may be holding a hidden limit order at 20.01. Second, among exchanges that permit 
discretionary limit orders, one or more exchanges may be holding a discretionary 
limit order that can be filled at the midpoint. For example, suppose that an exchange 
is holding a limit order to buy at 19.99 with 0.02 discretion. This order can be filled 
at 20.01 if a suitable sell limit order arrives at that price. Finally, among exchanges 
and dark pools that permit midspread orders, one or more exchanges or dark pools 
may be holding such an order. Dark pools are trading venues that do not publish their 
liquidity and are only available to selected clients. A midspread order is a limit order 
that is pegged to the midpoint of the quoted bid–ask spread.
To find such hidden liquidity, an electronic trading system may submit an immedi -
ate or cancel (IOC) order priced at 20.01 to the exchange that the trader expects will 
most likely have hidden liquidity on the needed side of the market. If such liquidity 
exists, the order will execute up to the minimum of the sizes of the two orders. If 
not, the exchange will immediately cancel the order and report the cancellation. If 
the order has any remaining unfilled size, the electronic trading system will search 
for liquidity at another exchange. This process will continue until the order is filled or 
until the trader decides that further search is probably futile. This sweeping tactic is 
most effective when the electronic trading system managing it has very low latency. 
A slow system may lose an opportunity to trade if someone else takes it first. Also, a 
slow system that obtains one or more partial fills may lose opportunities to trade at 
other exchanges if the proprietary electronic trading systems managing the standing 
orders that provide those opportunities cancel their standing orders when they sus -
pect someone is sweeping the market, as they might if they see trade reports inside 
the quoted spread.
An example of another trading tactic is placing a limit order at some price with 
the hope that it will fill at that price. If the order does not fill after some time period 
(which might be random or based on information), the electronic trading system will 
cancel the order and resubmit it with an improved price (i.e., a higher price for a buy 
order or a lower price for a sell order). The process is repeated until the order fills.
Algorithms.
Algorithms (“algos” for short) are programmed strategies for filling orders. Algorithms 
may use combinations or sequences of simple orders, advanced orders, or multiple 
orders to achieve their objectives. Buy-side traders use algorithms, often provided 
by brokers, extensively to trade small orders and to reduce the price impacts of large 
trades. For example, many algorithms break up large orders and submit the pieces 
to various markets over time. Breaking up orders makes it difficult for other traders 
to infer that a trader is trying to fill a large order. The algorithms typically submit 
the orders at random times, in random sizes, and sometimes to randomly selected 
exchanges to hide their common origin.
The rates at which algorithms try to fill large orders may depend on market 
volumes or on elapsed time. For example, VWAP algorithms attempt to obtain a 
volume-weighted average fill price that is close to (or better than) the volume-weighted 
average price (VWAP) of all trades arranged within a prespecified time interval. To 
minimize the variation between the actual average fill price and the VWAP over the 
interval, these algorithms try to participate in an equal fraction of all trading volume 
throughout the interval. To do so, they forecast volumes based on the historical 
volume profile and on current volumes. The algorithm trades more during periods 
of historically high volume (e.g., around market open and close) and when the mar -
ket has been more active than normal. It trades less during periods of relatively low 
volume. In practice, the execution rate will vary because volumes will differ from 
Electronic Trading System: Characteristics and Uses 431
expectations. Buy-side traders use VWAP algorithms when spreading the order over 
time and when obtaining the average market price within an interval is acceptable to 
them or their portfolio managers.
Many algorithms use floating limit orders with the hope of obtaining cheap execu -
tions. If they fail to fill after some time period, they may switch to more-aggressively 
priced orders or to marketable orders to ensure that they fill. Large traders who use 
algorithms to manage their orders are especially concerned about hiding their inten -
tions from front runners. Many electronic traders use artificial intelligence systems 
to detect when large traders are present in the market. In particular, they look for 
patterns that large traders may leave. For example, a poorly designed algorithm may 
submit orders exactly at the same millisecond within a second whenever it submits an 
order. A clever trader who is aware of this regularity may detect when a large trader is 
in the market and, equally important, when the trader has completed filling his order. 
To avoid these problems, algorithm designers often randomize order submission 
times and sizes to avoid producing patterns that might give them away. They also 
sometimes try to hide their orders among other orders so that front runners cannot 
easily identify their intentions.
Developing good algorithms requires extensive research into the origins of trans -
action costs. Algorithm authors must understand transaction costs well so that they 
can design algorithms that will trade effectively. To that end, algorithm providers 
build and estimate models of the costs of trading orders of various sizes, models of 
the impact trades of a given size or frequency will have on prices, and models of the 
probabilities that limit orders will fill under a variety of conditions. They must also 
predict volumes accurately. The most effective algorithms are based on the best research 
and implemented on the fastest and most capable electronic systems.
Good algorithms generally obtain low-cost executions by knowing when and 
where to offer liquidity via limit orders, when to use market orders, and how to most 
effectively keep the market from being aware of their efforts. They reduce the price 
impacts of large trades and greatly reduce the costs of managing many small trades.
EXAMPLE 3
Use of Electronic Brokers
1. You have recently been hired recently as a junior buy-side analyst. Part of 
your training (on-boarding) has been to sit with the trading desk to learn 
how the desk trades through its electronic brokers. In a meeting with your 
manager, she asks you to explain the use of electronic brokers for advanced 
orders, trading tactics, and algorithmic trading tools that your electronic 
brokers provide. What would you say?
Solution:
The use of electronic brokers and their systems is valuable for such ad -
vanced order types as pegged or floating limit orders, whose limit prices 
change as market conditions change. Traders use these order types to supply 
liquidity at a specified distance from the market. These orders require 
continuous real-time evaluation to determine if an order cancellation or 
replacement is needed as market conditions change. The use of electronic 
brokers relieves the need for the trader to continuously monitor the market 
to cancel and resubmit orders when prices change. An electronic broker is 
also valuable for orders placed a few ticks outside the best market that will 
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 432
be among the last orders to supply liquidity to a large trader, hopefully at a 
good price.
Electronic brokers also allow their clients to access order execution tactics 
(presented as another complex order type) that involve multiple submissions 
that may “sweep” through markets to uncover hidden liquidity. These tactics 
allow traders to submit multiple orders with a single instruction.
Finally, electronic brokers also provide algorithmic trading tools. Algorithms 
are automated (programmed trading strategies for combinations of simple 
and single, advanced, or multiple orders and various trading tactics) to fill 
small orders efficiently based on various criteria. They often break up large 
orders into smaller pieces to minimize the market impact of filling the order. 
They may route the orders to multiple venues at the same time or to the 
same venue at various times. For example, VWAP algorithms attempt to fill 
orders at the volume-weighted average price (or better) of all trades over 
a specified interval. The systems running algorithms that place standing 
limit orders must be very fast to cancel orders in trading. In these cases, low 
latency is critical to ensure order cancellation before unfavorable executions 
occur. Fast systems also help ensure that traders are first to respond when 
market conditions change and to maintain time precedence.
Select Examples of How Electronic Trading Changed Trading 
Strategies
The growth in electronic trading systems changed how traders interact with the mar -
ket. Proprietary traders, buy-side traders, and brokers adapted their trading strategies 
to use new electronic tools and facilities. Select characteristics of electronic trading 
are described below.
Hidden orders.
Hidden orders are very common in electronic markets. Hidden orders are orders that 
are exposed (or shown) only to the brokers or exchanges who receive them. Traders—
especially large traders—submit them when they do not want to reveal the existence 
of the trading options that their standing orders provide to the markets. Traders 
concerned about quote matchers can protect themselves to some extent by submit -
ting hidden limit orders. Note that hidden limit orders are the electronic equivalent 
of giving orders to floor brokers to fill with the understanding that the floor brokers 
may expose the orders only if they can arrange trades. Such orders work better at 
electronic exchanges than at floor-based exchanges because computers never inadver -
tently or intentionally display these orders improperly. In electronic markets, the most 
common type of order by far is the immediate or cancel (IOC) limit order. Traders 
use these orders to discover hidden orders that may stand in the spread between a 
market’s quoted bid and ask prices. Because they cancel immediately if they do not 
find liquidity, these orders are also hidden and thus do not reveal trade intentions.
Some electronic traders try to discover hidden orders by pinging the market: They 
submit a small IOC limit order for only a few shares at the price at which they are 
looking for hidden orders. If the pinging order trades, they know that a hidden order 
is present at that price; however, they do not know the full size of the order (which 
they can discover only by trading with it). Traders then may use this information to 
adjust their trading strategies.
All traders who subscribe to a complete trade feed that includes odd-lot transactions 
(substandard transaction sizes) can see the results of a ping that discovers liquidity. 
At almost all exchanges, however, only the pinger will know on which side of the 
Electronic Trading System: Characteristics and Uses 433
market the hidden liquidity lies. Nonetheless, the information produced by someone 
else’s successful ping can be useful to various traders. It indicates that someone in 
the market is concerned enough about liquidity conditions that pinging is worthwhile 
and that hidden liquidity is available on one side of the market.
Leapfrog.
When bid–ask spreads are wide, dealers often are willing to trade at better prices than 
they quote. They quote wide spreads because they hope to trade at more favorable 
prices. When another trader quotes a better price, dealers often immediately quote 
an even better price. For example, if the market is 20 bid, offered at 28, and a buy-side 
trader bids at 21, a dealer might instantly bid at 22. (The improved price might also 
come from a quote matcher.) This behavior frustrates buy-side traders, who then must 
quote a better price to maintain order precedence. If the spread is sufficiently wide, 
a game of leapfrog may ensue as the dealer jumps ahead again.
Flickering quotes.
Electronic markets often have flickering quotes, which are exposed limit orders that 
electronic traders submit and then cancel shortly thereafter, often within a second. 
Electronic dealers and algorithmic buy-side traders submit and repeatedly cancel and 
resubmit their orders when they do not want their orders to stand in the market; rather, 
they want other traders to see that they are willing to trade at the displayed price. 
Traders who wish to trade with a flickering quote can place a hidden limit order at 
the price where the quote is flickering. If the flickering order returns, it will hit their 
hidden limit order, and then they will trade with it.
Electronic arbitrage.
Electronic arbitrageurs use electronic trading systems to implement three types of 
arbitrage trading strategies:
1. Take liquidity on both sides . The costliest and least risky arbitrage trad -
ing strategy involves using marketable orders to fill both legs, or positions 
(i.e., buying an undervalued instrument and selling a similar overvalued 
instrument), of the arbitrage portfolio. This strategy is profitable only if the 
arbitrage spread is sufficiently large, but competition among arbitrageurs 
ensures that such large arbitrage spreads are quite rare. Arbitrageurs can 
seldom simultaneously take liquidity in two markets for identical instru -
ments and make a profit. To effectively execute this strategy, arbitrageurs 
must use very fast trading systems so that they can lock in the arbitrage 
spread before prices in one or both markets change.
2. Offer liquidity on one side . In this strategy, arbitrageurs offer liquidity in 
one or both markets in which they trade. When they obtain a fill in one 
market, they immediately take liquidity in the other market to complete the 
construction of their arbitrage portfolio. This strategy produces lower-cost 
executions, but it is a bit riskier than the first strategy.
For example, suppose that Markets A and B are both quoting 20 bid, offered 
at 21 for the same instrument. An arbitrageur may place a bid at 19 in 
Market A with the hope that a large seller will come along who takes all 
liquidity at 20 (i.e., fills all bids at 20) in Market A and then proceeds to fill 
the arbitrageur’s order at 19. If so, the arbitrageur will immediately try to 
sell to the 20 bid in Market B. If the arbitrageur is quick enough, he may be 
able to fill his order before the bidder at 20 in Market B cancels that bid and 
before any other trader—particularly the large trader—takes it. If successful, 
the arbitrageur realizes a profit of 1. Of course, the arbitrageur will immedi -
ately cancel his 19 bid in Market A if the 20 bid in Market B disappears.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 434
3. Offer liquidity on both sides.  The final arbitrage strategy involves offering 
liquidity in both markets. In this strategy, after the first order to execute fills, 
the arbitrageur continues to offer liquidity to complete the second trade. 
This strategy is the riskiest strategy because arbitrageurs are exposed to 
substantial price risk when one leg is filled and the other is not. Moreover, 
if prices are moving because well-informed traders are on the same side 
in both markets—as they might be if the well-informed traders possess 
information about common risk factors—the leg providing liquidity to the 
informed traders will fill quickly, whereas the other leg probably will not fill.
Arbitrageurs using this strategy trade much like dealers—switching from 
offering (supplying) liquidity to taking (demanding) liquidity when they 
believe that offering liquidity may be too risky. They may also often cancel 
and resubmit their orders when market conditions change. Thus, they are 
most effective when they use fast trading systems.
When the arbitrage spread reverts, as the arbitrageurs expect, the arbitra -
geurs will reverse their trades, often using the same strategy they used to 
acquire their arbitrage portfolios. Of course, if the spread never reverts, 
arbitrageurs will lose regardless of how they trade. They will lose less, how -
ever, if they can trade their arbitrage portfolio by offering liquidity in one or 
both legs.
Machine learning.
Machine learning, also known as data mining, uses advanced statistical methods to 
characterize data structures, particularly relations among variables. These methods 
include neural nets, genetic algorithms, classifiers, and other methods designed to 
explain variables of interest using sparse data or data for which the number of potential 
explanatory variables far exceeds the number of observations.
Machine-learning methods produce models based on observed empirical regular -
ities rather than on theoretical principles identified by analysts. These methods can 
be powerful when stable processes generate vast amounts of data, such as occurs in 
active financial markets.
Many trading problems are ideally suited for machine-learning analyses because 
the problems repeat regularly and often. For such problems, machine-based learning 
systems can be extraordinarily powerful.
However, these systems are often useless—or worse—when trading becomes 
extraordinary (e.g., when volatilities shoot up). Machine-learning systems frequently 
do not produce useful information during volatility episodes because these episodes 
have few precedents from which the machines can learn. Thus, traders often instruct 
their electronic trading systems to stop trading—and sometimes to close out their 
positions—whenever they recognize that they are entering uncharted territory. Many 
traders shut down when volatility spikes, both because high-volatility episodes are 
uncommon and thus not well understood and because even if such episodes were well 
understood, they represent periods of exceptionally high risk.
ELECTRONIC TRADING RISKS
describe the risks associated with electronic trading and how 
regulators mitigate them6
Electronic Trading Risks 435
The advent of electronic trading affected securities markets in many ways. Investors 
now benefit from greater trade process efficiencies and reduced transaction costs, but 
electronic trading also creates new systemic risks for market participants.
The HFT Arms Race
The competition among high-frequency traders (HFTs) has created an “arms race” in 
which each trader tries to be faster than the next. Consequently, the state-of-the-art, 
high-frequency trading technologies necessary to compete successfully are now very 
expensive, making entry quite costly. These costs form barriers to entry that can create 
natural monopolies. Although substantial evidence suggests that electronic trading 
benefits the markets, these benefits may erode if only a few HFTs survive and can 
exploit their unique positions. Already, many HFTs are quitting the markets because 
they cannot compete effectively.
More generally, many commentators have observed that most of the costly tech -
nologies that high-frequency traders acquire do little to promote better or more-liquid 
markets. HFTs primarily incur these costs so they can beat their competitors. The 
utilitarian traders who demand liquidity ultimately pay these costs. Concerns about 
the costs of the HFT arms race have led to calls for changes in market structure that 
would diminish the advantages of being faster. Some commentators suggest that 
markets be slowed by running call markets once a second or more often instead of 
trading continuously. Others suggest that the order processing be delayed by random 
intervals to reduce the benefits of being fast and thus the incentives to invest in speed.
Systemic Risks of Electronic Trading
Electronic trading created new systemic risks that concern regulators and practitioners. 
A systemic risk is a risk that some failure will hurt more than just the entity responsible 
for the failure. Systemic risks are particularly problematic when the responsible entity 
is not required or is unable to compensate others for the costs its failure imposes on 
them. When people do not bear the full costs of their behaviors, they tend not to be 
as careful in avoiding damaging behaviors as they otherwise would be.
Systemic risks associated with fast trading may be caused by electronic exchange 
trading system failures or excessive orders submitted by electronic traders. Electronic 
exchange trading system failures occur when programmers make mistakes, exchange 
servers have insufficient capacity to handle traffic, or computer hardware or commu -
nication lines fail.
The 18 May 2012 Facebook IPO at NASDAQ is an example of a trading system 
failure caused by a programming error that unexpectedly high demands on capacity 
revealed. In this case, two software processes locked into an infinite loop as they took 
turns responding to each other.
Examples of systemic risks caused by excessive orders submitted by electronic 
traders include the following:
 ■Runaway algorithms  produce streams of unintended orders that result from 
programming mistakes. The problems sometimes occur when programmers 
do not anticipate some contingency. The Knight Capital trading failure on 
1 August 2012 may be the most extreme example of a runaway algorithm 
incident. Owing to a software programming mistake, Knight sent millions of 
orders to the markets over a 45-minute period when it intended only to fill 
212 orders, some of which normally might have been broken up but none 
of which would have generated so many orders. These orders produced 4 
million executions involving 397 stocks. Knight lost $400 million in the 
incident.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 436
 ■Fat finger errors  occur when a manual trader submits a larger order than 
intended. They are called fat finger errors because they sometimes occur 
when a trader hits the wrong key or hits a key more often than intended. 
These types of errors are not unique to electronic trading systems, but their 
consequences are often greater in electronic systems because of the speed 
at which they operate and because clerks often catch these errors in manual 
trading systems before they cause problems.
 ■Overlarge orders  demand more liquidity than the market can provide. In 
these events, a trader—often inexperienced—will try to execute a market -
able order that is too large for the market to handle without severely dis -
rupting prices in the time given to fill the order. The 6 May 2010 Flash Crash 
occurred as a result of such an order. The crash was triggered when a large 
institutional trader tried to sell $4.1 billion in E-mini S&P 500 futures con -
tracts using an algorithm over a short period. The algorithm was designed to 
participate in a fixed fraction of the market volume. When the initial trades 
depressed S&P 500 futures prices, trading volumes increased substantially 
as arbitrageurs and others started to trade. The increase in trading volumes 
caused the algorithm to increase the rate of its order submissions, which 
exacerbated the problem. The market reverted to its former levels after the 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange briefly halted trading in the E-mini S&P 500 
futures contract, and the large order eventually was filled.
 ■Malevolent order streams  are created deliberately to disrupt the markets. 
The perpetrators may be market manipulators; aggrieved employees, 
such as traders or software engineers; or terrorists. Traders conducting 
denial-of-service attacks designed to overwhelm their competitors’ elec -
tronic trading systems with excessive quotes also may create malevolent 
order streams.
The solutions to the systemic risk problems associated with electronic trading 
systems are multifold:
 ■Most obviously, traders must test software thoroughly before using it in live 
trading. Exchanges often conduct mock trading sessions to allow developers 
to test their software.
 ■Rigorous market access controls must ensure that only those orders coming 
from approved sources enter electronic order-matching systems.
 ■Rigorous access controls on software developers must ensure that only 
authorized developers can change software. Best practice mandates that 
these controls also include the requirement that all software be read, under -
stood, and vouched for by at least one developer besides its author.
 ■The electronic traders who generate orders and the electronic exchanges 
that receive orders must surveil their order flow in real time to ensure that 
it conforms to preset parameters that characterize its expected volume, size, 
and other characteristics. When the order flow is different than expected, 
automatic controls must shut it off immediately.
 ■Brokers must surveil all client orders that clients introduce into electronic 
trading systems to ensure that their clients’ trading is appropriate. Brokers 
must not allow their clients to enter orders directly into exchange trading 
systems—a process called sponsored naked access—because it would allow 
clients to avoid broker oversight.
 ■Some exchanges have adopted price limits and trade halts to stop trad -
ing when prices move too quickly. These rules stop trading when excess 
demands for liquidity occur. They also prevent the extreme price changes 
Electronic Trading Risks 437
that can occur in electronic markets when market orders arrive and no 
liquidity is present. Most brokers now automatically convert market orders 
into marketable limit orders to ensure that they do not trade at unreason -
able prices.
HISTORICAL EVENT: THE FLASH CRASH
The 6 May 2010 Flash Crash was the most notable market structure event in 
recent memory. During the crash, which started at about 2:42 p.m. ET, the E-mini 
S&P 500 futures contract dropped approximately 5% in 5 minutes and then 
recovered nearly fully in the next 10 minutes. The price volatility spilled from 
the equity futures market into the stock market, where some stocks traded down 
more than 99% or up more than 1,000%. In the immediate aftermath of the crash, 
regulators decided that more than 20,000 trades in more than 300 securities that 
occurred more than 60% away from earlier prices would be broken (canceled).
This extraordinary event raised many concerns about security market struc -
ture—in particular, how the adoption of electronic trading may have increased 
potential systemic risks. This subsection describes the events that led up to the 
crash, what happened during the crash, and the regulatory responses to the crash.
The Event and Its Causes
On Thursday, 6 May 2010, the stock market traded down throughout the day at 
an accelerating rate. By 2:30 p.m., it had lost about 4% from its previous close. 
Contemporaneous commentators attributed the fall to concerns about Greek 
sovereign debt and the implications of a Greek default for other markets. During 
the day, many traders who had been providing liquidity to the market were accu -
mulating substantial long positions as people demanded to sell. As the day wore 
on, their willingness to continue to accumulate additional inventory decreased. 
Moreover, day traders, who do not normally carry inventory overnight, also were 
considering how and when they would sell their losing positions.
Presumably, in response to the European concerns and perhaps other con -
cerns, portfolio managers at Waddell & Reed Financial Inc. (W&R) decided to 
reduce US equity exposure in their $27 billion Asset Strategy Fund by selling 
75,000 June 2010 E-mini S&P 500 futures contracts with a nominal value of 
approximately $4.1 billion. They gave this order to their buy-side trader, who 
proceeded to fill it using an algorithm that split the order into small pieces for 
execution. Although the order was the largest single order submitted to the E-mini 
futures market that year, it was not without precedent. Two earlier orders in the 
previous year were of similar size or larger, one of which had been submitted 
by W&R. Those orders had been filled in more stable markets and over longer 
periods of time than W&R’s 6 May order. The order started to execute at 2:32 p.m.
W&R’s head trader, who normally would have handled such a large order, 
was out of the office that day. Instead, a less-senior trader in his office handled 
the order.
The trader set parameters on the algorithm to target an execution rate of 
9% of the trading volume calculated over the previous minute without regard 
to price or time. This trading strategy was more aggressive than the one W&R 
had used to fill its large order from the previous year. The trader probably set an 
aggressive rate because he feared that the firm would obtain a worse execution if 
prices continued to fall. The more aggressive strategy contributed to the crash.
When the initial trades depressed S&P 500 futures prices, trading volumes 
increased substantially as arbitrageurs and others started to trade, many of them 
trading with each other as they normally did. The arbitrageurs bought the futures 
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 438
and sold equities and equity ETFs (exchange-traded funds), such as the SPDR 
S&P 500 Trust (ticker SPY). Some arbitrageurs also sold call option contracts 
and bought put option contracts. The increase in trading volumes caused the 
algorithm to increase the rate of its order submissions as it tried to keep up with 
its mandate to participate in 9% of the market volume. The increasing order 
submission rate exacerbated the problem.
Initially, high-frequency traders and other liquidity suppliers in the E-mini 
futures markets supplied liquidity to W&R’s order and accumulated long posi -
tions. Between 2:41 p.m. and 2:44 p.m., these short-term traders sold these 
positions as the algorithm continued to pump more orders into the market. 
During this 4-minute period, the E-mini dropped 3%. By the end of this period, 
buy-side depth (total size of standing buy orders) in the E-mini contract dropped 
to only 1% of the average depth observed earlier in the day. The E-mini contract 
then dropped 1.7% in the next 15 seconds.
The arbitrage trades caused the equity markets to drop. In many securities— 
especially the ETFs—falling prices triggered stock loss market orders, which 
further depressed prices. The levered ETFs were particularly affected because 
their high volatilities make them popular with technical traders and retail traders, 
many of whom routinely place stop orders to protect their positions.
As the prices changed quickly, many traders who were providing liquidity 
in the futures and equity markets dropped out because they were unwilling to 
trade in the face of such extreme volatility. Many also had already accumulated 
large inventory positions from earlier in the day and did not want to buy more. 
Interestingly, researchers later discovered that the largest and most active 
high-frequency trading firms did not withdraw. Nonetheless, limit order books 
thinned out—especially on the buy side—as traders canceled standing orders 
and as sellers filled those buy orders still standing.
In some stocks, all standing buy orders were exhausted and trading stopped. 
In other stocks, all buy orders except those placed with a limit price of only a 
cent or two were exhausted. In these stocks, exchange trading systems blindly 
filled market sell orders at extraordinarily low prices. In a few other stocks, the 
withdrawal of liquidity suppliers from the market also removed essentially all 
liquidity from the sell side of the market. Some stocks then traded at prices as 
high as $100,000 when market buy orders were filled against sell orders placed 
at extraordinarily high prices.
The slide stopped at 2:45:28 p.m. when a Chicago Mercantile Exchange 
trading rule called Stop Logic Functionality caused the exchange’s computers to 
halt trading briefly in the E-mini S&P 500 futures contract and to clear the limit 
order book of all standing limit orders. The rule is triggered when it becomes 
apparent that pending order executions would cause prices to jump too far. The 
futures contract dropped about 5% from when the algorithm started to trade 
at 2:32 p.m. to the market halt at 2:45 p.m. The algorithm sold about 35,000 
contracts during this period.
When trading resumed 5 seconds later, the buy-side algorithm continued to 
trade, but many liquidity suppliers were now willing to provide liquidity. Prices 
rose quickly in orderly markets.
The episode largely ended when the big W&R order completed filling at 
around 2:51 p.m., about 20 minutes after it started. However, the market remained 
quite volatile during the remainder of the day as traders adjusted their positions 
and responded to the extreme volatility.
Following the crash, regulators broke all trades that had occurred more than 
60% away from the previous close.
Electronic Trading Risks 439
Implications for Traders
The Flash Crash provided three important lessons for observant traders:
 ■First, market orders are incompatible with electronic order-match -
ing systems that do not curb trading when prices move too quickly. 
Had traders priced all their orders, no trades would have taken place 
at unreasonably high or low prices. Following the crash, many retail 
brokers adopted a policy of converting all customer market orders into 
marketable limit orders with limit prices set about 10% above the cur -
rent ask for buy orders and 10% below the current bid for sell orders.
 ■Second, institutional traders using algorithms must be careful not to 
demand more liquidity than orderly markets can provide. Most buy-
side investors probably immediately recognized that W&R lost a sub -
stantial amount of its clients’ money owing to the extraordinarily high 
transaction costs associated with the trade. To obtain a crude estimate 
of this loss, assume that the algorithm traded all $4.1 billion of its 
order at a uniform rate throughout the 5% price reversal. The average 
market impact of the trade would have been 2.5%, which implies total 
transaction costs of about $100 million, or 0.37% of the $27 billion in 
assets of the W&R Asset Strategy Fund. Such significant losses attract 
attention. Within a week, many algorithm writers probably coded 
limits into their algorithms to help prevent them from being used 
irresponsibly.
 ■Finally, algorithm writers and the traders who use algorithms must 
pay much more attention to the dangers of using algorithms that can 
create destructive feedback loops. They particularly must understand 
how algorithms respond to market conditions that they may create 
themselves.
Regulatory Responses
Following the Flash Crash, regulators adopted new rules to prevent a similar 
crash from happening again. They placed curbs that halt trades in a stock for 
5 minutes if prices move up or down by more than 10% for large stocks and 
20% for smaller stocks. This rule ensures that prices cannot move too quickly, 
but it does not prevent traders from behaving foolishly. Had it been in effect 
during the Flash Crash, the rule would have stopped trades from occurring at 
ridiculously low or high prices, but it would not have stopped the W&R trader 
from submitting an unrealistically aggressive order.
Regulators also adopted rules to establish when and which trades will be 
broken in the event of another extreme price change. Such rules should help 
ensure that liquidity suppliers who are afraid that their trades may be broken 
do not withdraw from the market prematurely.
EXAMPLE 4
Electronic Trading and Transaction Costs
1. Describe the impact of electronic trading on transaction costs.
Solution:
Growth in electronic trading has resulted in greater trade process efficien -
cies and reduced transaction costs for investors. Electronic systems are 
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 440
much cheaper to operate than floor-based systems (requiring less physi -
cal space and fewer exchange personnel). These systems can operate on a 
close-to-continuous basis at far greater scale and scope and at much faster 
speeds than humans. Process efficiencies from electronic trading have led 
to significant decreases in bid–ask spreads, which have lowered transaction 
costs for investors.
DETECTING ABUSIVE TRADING PRACTICES
describe abusive trading practices that real-time surveillance of 
markets may detect
Regulators around the world recognize that real-time market monitoring and sur -
veillance systems allow faster responses to potential crises and market abuses with 
the potential for rapid intervention to prevent or minimize damages. Many trad -
ing venues have long used real-time surveillance technologies, but their use is not 
consistent across all markets. The goal of real-time market surveillance is to detect 
potential market abuse while it is happening. Real-time surveillance often can detect 
the following damaging behaviors:
Front running.
Front running involves buying in front of anticipated purchases and selling in front 
of anticipated sales. In most jurisdictions, front running is illegal if the front runners 
acquire their information about orders improperly—for example, by a tip from a 
broker handling a large order.
Some traders use electronic artificial intelligence systems to identify when traders 
are filling large orders over time by breaking them up into small pieces. When these 
traders suspect that buyers or sellers are working large orders, they will trade ahead 
on the same side with the hope of benefiting when the large traders move prices as 
they fill their orders. This front-running strategy is legal if the information on which 
it is based is properly obtained— for example, by watching a market data feed.
Front running increases transaction costs for the traders whose orders are front 
run because the front runners take liquidity that the front-run traders otherwise would 
have taken for themselves.
Market manipulation.
In general, market manipulation consists of any trading strategy whose purpose is 
to produce misleading or false market prices, quotes, or fundamental information 
to profit from distorting the normal operation of markets. Market manipulators are 
parasitic traders who attempt to fool or force others into making disadvantageous 
trades. Many market manipulation strategies exist—including bluffing, squeezing, 
cornering, and gunning.
In most jurisdictions, market manipulation strategies are illegal. Enforcement 
is often difficult, however, because the exact infractions can be hard to define and 
because prosecutors generally must prove scienter (a legal term meaning intent or 
knowledge of wrongdoing), which can be difficult when defendants suggest alternative 
explanations for their behavior.7
Detecting Abusive Trading Practices 441
Market manipulation strategies usually involve one or more of the following 
improper market activities:
 ■Trading for market impact  involves trading to raise or lower prices deliber -
ately. A market manipulator often is willing to incur substantial transaction 
costs to raise or lower the price of a security to influence other traders’ 
perceptions of value.
 ■Rumormongering  is the dissemination of false information about fundamen -
tal values or about other traders’ trading intentions to alter investors’ value 
assessments. Financial analysts must be careful to ensure that they base 
their analyses on valid information and not on false information designed to 
fool them into making poor decisions. Note that although rumormongering 
is illegal in most jurisdictions, simply reporting one side of an issue is not 
illegal. Financial analysts, therefore, must also be careful to ensure that they 
base their analyses on balanced information and not on information that is 
true but selectively presented to them with the purpose of distorting their 
analyses.
 ■Wash trading  consists of trades arranged among commonly controlled 
accounts to create the impression of market activity at a particular price. 
The purpose of wash trading is to fool investors into believing that a mar -
ket is more liquid than it truly is and to thereby increase investors’ confi -
dence both in their ability to exit positions without substantial cost and in 
their assessments of security values. Manipulators also can achieve these 
purposes by falsely reporting trades that never occurred, which is essen -
tially what happens when they arrange trades among commonly controlled 
accounts.
 ■Spoofing , also known as layering , is a trading practice in which traders place 
exposed standing limit orders to convey an impression to other traders that 
the market is more liquid than it is or to suggest to other traders that the 
security is under- or overvalued. For example, suppose that a spoofer wants 
to buy stock cheaply or quickly. The spoofer might place a hidden buy order 
in the market. The spoofer then places one or more exposed sell limit orders 
in the market to convey the impression that prices may soon fall. Seeing 
the spoofing sell orders, one or more traders may conclude that values may 
be lower than market prices suggest. On that basis, they may sell into the 
spoofer’s buy order, enabling the spoofer to obtain a quick and possibly 
cheaper purchase than the spoofer otherwise would have obtained had the 
spoofer not placed the spoofing sell orders. Of course, immediately follow -
ing the execution of the buy order, the spoofer will cancel the sell orders.
Spoofing is risky because the spoofing orders that spoofers submit might 
execute before their intended orders execute. Spoofers can manage this 
risk by keeping track of the orders in the limit order book ahead of their 
spoofing orders. If these orders fill before the spoofers’ intended orders fill, 
spoofers will cancel their spoofing orders to prevent them from executing. 
To effectively manage these processes, spoofers use electronic systems to 
monitor trading and to ensure that they can quickly cancel their orders as 
soon as they no longer want them to stand.
Market manipulators often use these improper market activities singly or in com -
bination when they try to fool or force other traders into trades that will ultimately 
prove to be disadvantageous to them. Market manipulation strategies include:
 ■Bluffing . Bluffing involves submitting orders and arranging trades to influ -
ence other traders’ perceptions of value. Bluffers often prey on momentum 
traders, who buy when prices are rising and sell when prices are falling. For 
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 442
example, consider typical “pump-and-dump” schemes in which bluffers buy 
stock to raise its price and thereby encourage momentum traders to buy. 
The bluffers then sell the stock to the momentum traders at higher prices. 
To further the scheme, bluffers may engage in such activities as rumormon -
gering or wash trading. Note also that bluffers may time their purchases 
to immediately follow the release of valid positive information about the 
security and thereby fool traders into overvaluing the material significance 
of the new information.
In a pump-and-dump manipulation, the bluffer tries to raise prices. Similar 
manipulations can occur on the short side, though they are less common. 
In such manipulations, manipulators take short positions and then try to 
repurchase shares at lower prices. These manipulations are often called 
“short and distorts. ”
To avoid falling into these traps, financial analysts must ensure that they 
base their analyses on independent assessments of value. Their analyses 
must have a proper foundation as required by Standard V(A): Diligence 
and Reasonable Basis, of the CFA Institute Code of Ethics and Standards of 
Professional Conduct.
 ■Gunning the market . Gunning the market is a strategy used by market 
manipulators to force traders to do disadvantageous trades. A manipula -
tor generally guns the market by selling quickly to push prices down with 
the hope of triggering stop-loss sell orders. A stop-loss (or stop) sell order 
becomes valid for execution once the specified stop price condition is met 
by a trade occurring at or below the stop price. For example, suppose that 
a market manipulator believes that traders have placed many stop-loss sell 
orders at 50. These sell orders would become valid upon a trade occurring 
at 50 or below. The manipulator may sell aggressively to push prices down 
from 51 to 50 and thereby trigger the stop-loss sell orders. The manipulator 
then may be able to profit by repurchasing at lower prices.
 ■Squeezing and cornering . Squeezing, cornering, and gunning the market 
are all schemes that market manipulators use to force traders to do disad -
vantageous trades. In a squeeze or corner, the manipulator obtains control 
over resources necessary to settle trading contracts. The manipulator then 
unexpectedly withdraws those resources from the market, which causes 
traders to default on their contracts, some of which the manipulator may 
hold. The manipulator profits by providing the resources at high prices or by 
closing the contracts at exceptionally high prices.
For example, in short squeezes, manipulators obtain control of a substan -
tial fraction of all available lendable stock shares or bonds. If the securities 
are overvalued, as they might be if the manipulators are also engaging in a 
pump and dump, many speculators may be short selling the securities by 
unknowingly borrowing them from the manipulators. The manipulators 
then will recall the security loans. If the short sellers (“shorts”) cannot bor -
row the securities from others, they will be forced to buy securities in the 
market to cover their stock loans. Their purchases will raise prices and allow 
the manipulators to sell their securities at overvalued prices. Manipulators 
also may profit by raising the rates they charge to lend their securities. To 
avoid being caught in a short squeeze, short sellers must be sure that the 
market for lendable securities has many participants and is not concentrated 
in the hands of one or more entities acting in concert.
In commodity market corners, manipulators buy many futures contracts 
while simultaneously buying in the spot markets much of the deliverable 
supply of the commodity. When the contract approaches expiration, the 
Detecting Abusive Trading Practices 443
manipulators then demand delivery from the shorts, most of whom will not 
own the deliverable commodity. The shorts then must buy the deliverable 
supply from the manipulators at exceptionally high prices. Alternatively, 
they may repurchase their contracts from the manipulators, again at very 
high prices.
Corners can occur in commodity markets because most participants in 
commodity futures contracts do not demand to receive or make delivery 
when the contract expires. Instead, they close their positions by arranging 
offsetting trades in the futures market, either because they are simultane -
ously accepting or making delivery elsewhere or because they are rolling 
their positions into future contract months. Accordingly, most short sellers 
neither expect nor intend to make delivery. When forced to make delivery, 
they are caught short.
Corners are illegal in most jurisdictions, and they always violate the rules 
of the exchanges on which futures contracts trade. In general, long holders 
cannot demand delivery if they do not have a valid business reason for doing 
so. However, enforcement is complicated by the fact that manipulators may 
offer plausible reasons for requesting unexpected deliveries. Note also that 
sometimes, unexpected supply shortages coupled with unexpected legiti -
mate demands for delivery can result in inadvertent short squeezes. Thus, 
short sellers who do not intend to make delivery should try to close their 
positions early to ensure that they are not caught in an intentional corner or 
an inadvertent squeeze.
SUMMARY
This reading explains the implicit and explicit costs of trading as well as widely used 
methods for estimating transaction costs. The reading also describes developments in 
electronic trading, the main types of electronic traders, their needs for speed and ways 
in which they trade. Electronic trading benefits investors through lower transaction 
costs and greater efficiencies but also introduces systemic risks and the need to closely 
monitor markets for abusive trading practices. Appropriate market governance and 
regulatory policies will help reduce the likelihood of events such as the 2010 Flash 
Crash. The reading’s main points include:
 ■Dealers provide liquidity to buyers and sellers when they take the other side 
of a trade if no other willing traders are present.
 ■The bid–ask spread is the difference between the bid and the ask prices. 
The effective spread is two times the difference between the trade price and 
the midquote price before the trade occurred. The effective spread is a poor 
estimate of actual transaction costs when large orders have been filled in 
many parts over time or when small orders receive price improvement.
 ■Transaction costs include explicit costs and implicit costs. Explicit costs are 
the direct costs of trading. They include broker commissions, transaction 
taxes, stamp duties, and exchange fees. Implicit costs include indirect costs, 
such as the impact of the trade on the price received. The bid–ask spread, 
market impact, delay, and unfilled trades all contribute to implicit trading 
costs.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 444
 ■The implementation shortfall method measures the total cost of implement -
ing an investment decision by capturing all explicit and implicit trading 
costs. It includes the market impact costs, delay costs, as well as opportunity 
costs.
 ■The VWAP method of estimating transaction costs compares average fill 
prices to average market prices during a period surrounding the trade. It 
tends to produce lower transaction cost estimates than does implementation 
shortfall because it often does not measure the market impact of an order 
well.
 ■Markets have become increasingly fragmented as venues trading the same 
instruments have proliferated. Trading in any given instrument now occurs 
in multiple venues.
 ■The advantages of electronic trading systems include cost and operational 
efficiencies, lack of human bias, extraordinarily fast speed, and infinite span 
and scope of attention.
 ■Latency is the elapsed time between the occurrence of an event and a sub -
sequent action that depends on that event. Traders use fast communication 
systems and fast computer systems to minimize latency to execute their 
strategies faster than others.
 ■Hidden orders, quote leapfrogging, flickering quotes, and the use of machine 
learning to support trading strategies commonly are found in electronic 
markets.
 ■Traders commonly use advanced order types, trading tactics, and algorithms 
in electronic markets.
 ■Electronic trading has benefited investors through greater trade process effi -
ciencies and reduced transaction costs. At the same time, electronic trading 
has increased systemic risks.
 ■Examples of systemic risks posed by electronic traders include: runaway 
algorithms that produce streams of unintended orders caused by program -
ming mistakes, fat finger errors that occur when a manual trader submits 
a larger order than intended, overlarge orders that demand more liquidity 
than the market can provide, and malevolent order streams created deliber -
ately to disrupt the markets.
 ■Real-time surveillance of markets often can detect order front running and 
various market manipulation strategies.
 ■Market manipulators use such improper activities as trading for market 
impact, rumormongering, wash trading, and spoofing to further their 
schemes.
 ■Market manipulation strategies include bluffing, squeezing, cornering, and 
gunning.
Practice Problems 445
PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions 
1-10
Brian Johnson is a senior manager at Star Asset Management (SAMN), a large 
asset management firm in the United States. Tim Martin has just earned his ad -
vanced degree in statistics and was hired to support the trading team at SAMN. 
Martin meets with Johnson to undergo a training relating to SAMN’s trading 
activities.
Johnson begins the training with a review of the limit order book for Light 
Systems, Inc., which is presented in Exhibit 1. Three dealers make market for the 
shares of Light Systems. Based on these prices, SAMN’s trading desk executes a 
market sell order for 1,100 shares of Light Systems.
Exhibit 1: Limit Order Book for Light Systems, Inc.
Bid   Ask
DealerTime 
Entered Price Size 
DealerTime 
Entered Price Size
B 10.10 a.m. $17.15 900  C 10.11 a.m. $17.19 1,200
C 10.11 a.m. $17.14 1,500  B 10.10 a.m. $17.20 800
A 10.11 a.m. $17.12 1,100  A 10.12 a.m. $17.22 1,100
Johnson then discusses a market buy order for 5,000 shares of an illiquid stock. 
The order was filled in three trades, and details about the three trades are pre -
sented in Exhibit 2.
Exhibit 2: Buy Trade Order Details
Trade # Time Trade Price Trade Size Bid Price Ask Price
1 9.45 a.m. $25.20 1,200 $25.17 $25.20
2 9.55 a.m. $25.22 1,300 $25.19 $25.22
3 11.30 a.m. $25.27 2,500 $25.22 $25.26
Johnson explains to Martin that the number of venues trading the same instru -
ments has proliferated in recent years, and trading in any given instrument has 
now been distributed across these multiple venues. As a result, the available 
liquidity on any one of those exchanges represents just a small portion of the ag -
gregate liquidity for that security. As a result, SAMN has had to adapt its trading 
strategies, particularly for large trades.
Johnson asks Martin about his views on how the introduction of electronic trad -
ing might have impacted SAMN. Martin tells Johnson:
Statement 1 Once built, electronic trading systems are more efficient and 
cheaper to operate than floor-based trading systems.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 446
Statement 2 Electronic trading systems have attracted a lot of new buy-side 
traders, and the increased competition has resulted in narrower 
bid–ask spreads.
Statement 3 The introduction of electronic markets has had a much greater 
impact on the trading of corporate and municipal bonds than on 
the trading of equities.
Johnson tells Martin that communication speed is SAMN’s current highest pri -
ority. All of SAMN’s competitors have increased their communication speeds in 
recent months, and Johnson says management wants SAMN to be faster than its 
competitors. SAMN’s trading desk is located in a residential area far from down -
town where the exchanges it works with are located. SAMN’s trading team is 
relatively large with experienced investment professionals, and the firm recently 
invested in fast computers with the latest algorithms.
At the end of the training, Johnson gives Martin his first assignment. The as -
signment is for Martin to use the vast amount of data that SAMN has collected 
to design a machine learning (ML) model using advanced statistical methods to 
characterize data structures and relations. Then he has to build a trading algo -
rithm based on the same model. Since electronic trading has added systemic risk 
to the market, Johnson asks Martin to suggest ways to minimize the systemic risk 
introduced by his algorithm. Martin offers two suggestions:
Suggestion 1 Perform extensive testing of the algorithm before its launch.
Suggestion 2 Impose mandatory trading halts if prices change outside a 
threshold range.
A month into the job, Johnson sends Martin to an investment conference focused 
on abusive trading practices. Based on what he learned at the conference, Martin 
recommends to Johnson that SAMN incorporate a new rule that news be validat -
ed before a trade triggered by news is executed.
1. Based on Exhibit 1, the inside bid–ask spread for the limit order book for Light 
Systems is closest  to:
A. $0.04.
B. $0.07.
C. $0.10.
2. Based on Exhibit 1, the total amount that SAMN will receive, on a per share 
basis, for executing the market sell order is closest  to:
A. $17.14.
B. $17.15.
C. $17.22.
3. Based on Exhibit 2, the market impact relating to Trade 2, on a per share basis, is 
closest  to:
A. $0.02.
B. $0.03.
C. $0.07.
Practice Problems 447
4. Based on Exhibit 2, the average effective spread of the three trades is closest to :
A. $0.0333.
B. $0.0367.
C. $0.0400.
5. The reason for SAMN having to adapt its trading strategies is a result of:
A. latency.
B. market fragmentation.
C. high frequency trading.
6. Which of Martin’s statements relating to the introduction of electronic markets is 
correct?
A. Statement 1
B. Statement 2
C. Statement 3
7. Which of the following changes should SAMN make to address its key priority?
A. Hire more investment professionals
B. Upgrade to more complex operating systems
C. Move the trading desk physically closer to the exchanges it works with
8. The model that Martin is tasked with designing will likely be most  effective:
A. for testing new markets.
B. in a well-understood market environment.
C. during periods of higher than normal market volatility.
9. Which of Martin’s suggestions will most likely  be effective in limiting the systemic 
risk introduced by his algorithm?
A. Only Suggestion 1
B. Only Suggestion 2
C. Both Suggestion 1 and Suggestion 2
10. Which market manipulation strategy is most likely  the target of the new rule 
suggested by Martin?
A. Rumormongering
B. Gunning the market
C. Trading for market impact
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 448
The following information relates to questions 
11-16
Michael Bloomfield is a trader at 2Fast Trading, a proprietary trading company 
that uses machine learning and algorithms to execute trades. He works with Amy 
Riley, a junior trader at the company. Bloomfield and Riley meet to review the 
company’s trading systems and several trades in Bloomfield’s trading account.
They discuss the increasing impact of market fragmentation on available liquidity 
for the company’s trading strategies. Riley makes the following comments regard -
ing market fragmentation:
Comment 1 Liquidity aggregation and smart order routing help trad -
ers manage the challenges and opportunities presented by 
fragmentation.
Comment 2 With increasing market fragmentation, traders who fill large 
orders now search for liquidity across multiple venues and 
across time to control market impact.
Bloomfield tells Riley that he noticed trades of 500 shares of BYYP stock were 
executed every 20 minutes for an hour. Bloomfield saw the same pattern of 
trading in the stock during the previous trading day. He instructs Riley to submit 
an order to purchase BYYP shares on the assumption that a trader seeks liquidity 
and is executing a large buy order by breaking it into pieces. The prices of these 
trades and the best bids and offers in the market when the BYYP trades occurred 
are presented in Exhibit 1.
Exhibit 1: BYYP Trade Details
Trade Trade Price Prevailing Bid Prevailing Offer
1 41.50 41.45 41.50
2 41.75 41.73 41.75
Bloomfield shifts the conversation to AXZ Corp. Bloomfield notes that AXZ’s 
bid–ask spread is narrow, even though AXZ’s share price has been experiencing a 
period of high volatility. After extensive research, Bloomfield will purchase AXZ 
shares using a trading strategy that does not include standing orders.
Bloomfield then assesses the risks that 2Fast’s electronic trading strategies intro -
duce into the market. He is concerned that these risks may bring on more regula -
tion. Bloomfield claims that the risks can be reduced by changing the structure of 
the market, and those structural changes can maintain 2Fast’s primary competi -
tive advantage, which is trading faster than competitors.
Bloomfield mentions that a regulatory body is investigating a competitor’s trad -
ing practices. The investigation involves a tip that the competitor is manipulating 
markets by submitting orders and arranging trades to influence other traders’ 
perceptions of value. Specifically, regulators were informed that the compet -
itor has been buying stock to raise its price, thereby encouraging momentum 
traders to buy, and then selling the stock to them at higher prices. The regulator 
confirmed that the competitor did not use standing limit orders or commonly 
controlled accounts for the trades under investigation.
Practice Problems 449
11. Which of Riley’s comments related to market fragmentation is accurate?
A. Only Comment 1
B. Only Comment 2
C. Both Comment 1 and Comment 2
12. Bloomfield’s strategy to purchase BYYP shares is best classified as electronic:
A. arbitrage.
B. front running.
C. quote matching.
13. Based on Exhibit 1, the average effective spread of the BYYP trades is closest  to:
A. $0.018.
B. $0.035.
C. $0.070.
14. Bloomfield’s trading strategy for the purchase of AXZ shares most likely  includes 
the use of:
A. flickering quotes.
B. machine learning.
C. leapfrogging quotes.
15. Which structural change for the market associated with electronic trading sys -
tems is most consistent with Bloomfield’s claim?
A. Delaying order processing by random intervals
B. Exchanges using trade halts when prices move too quickly
C. Slowing markets by running call markets once a second or more often 
instead of trading continuously
16. The competitor company’s trading is best described as:
A. bluffing.
B. spoofing.
C. wash trading.
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 450
SOLUTIONS
1. A is correct. The inside bid–ask spread, or market bid–ask spread, is the differ -
ence between the highest bid price and the lowest ask price. The highest bid price 
for Light Systems is $17.15, and the lowest ask price is $17.19. Therefore, the 
inside bid–ask spread = $17.19 − $17.15 = $0.04.
2. B is correct. SAMN’s trading desk executes a market sell order for 1,100 shares. 
Based on the limit order book, the trader would first sell 900 shares at $17.15 
(highest bid, Dealer B) and then sell the remaining 200 shares at $17.14 (second 
highest bid, Dealer C). Therefore, the approximate price per share received by 
SAMN for selling the 1,100 shares is equal to [(900 × $17.15) + (200 × $17.14)] / 
1,100 = $17.1482 per share ($17.15 rounded).
3. A is correct. Market impact, or price impact, is the effect of a trade on transac -
tion prices. After the first trade (Trade 1) was executed at $25.20, Trade 2 was 
executed at $25.22, which is $0.02 per share higher than the trade price of Trade 
1. So, the execution of Trade 1 led to a price impact of $0.02 per share on Trade 2.
4. C is correct. The effective bid–ask spread for buy orders is calculated as:
 Effective bid–ask spread (buy order) = 2 × {Trade price − [(Ask price + Bid 
price) / 2)]} or
  = 2 × (Trade price − Midpoint of the market 
at the time an order is entered).
So, the effective bid–ask spreads for the three buy trades are calculated as:
 Effective spread of Trade 1 = 2 × {$25.20 − [($25.20 + $25.17)/2]}  = $0.0300.
 Effective spread of Trade 2 = 2 × {$25.22 − [($25.22 + 25.19)/2]}  = $0.0300.
 Effective spread of Trade 3 = 2 × {$25.27 − [($25.26 + $25.22)/2]}  = $0.0600.
The resulting average effective spread is then calculated as:
 Average effective spread 
 = (Effective  spread of Trade 1 + Effective spread of Trade 2 + Effective spread of 
Trade 3)/3.
 Average effective spread = ($0.0300 + $0.0300 + $0.0600)/3  = $0.0400.
5. B is correct. According to Johnson, markets have become increasingly fragment -
ed as the number of venues trading the same instruments has proliferated and 
trading in any given instrument has been split (or fragmented) across these mul -
tiple venues. As a result, the available liquidity on any one exchange represents 
just a small portion of the aggregate liquidity for that instrument. This phenom -
enon is known as market fragmentation and creates the potential for price and 
liquidity disparities across venues. As a result, SAMN has had to adapt its trading 
strategies to this fragmented liquidity to avoid intensifying the market impact of 
a large trade.
6. A is correct. Once built, electronic systems are indeed cheaper to operate than 
floor-based trading systems. They require less physical space than do trad -
ing floors, and in contrast to floor-based trading systems, they do not require 
exchange officials to record and report prices. Furthermore, the widespread use 
Solutions 451
of electronic trading systems significantly decreased trading costs for buy-side 
traders. Costs fell as exchanges obtained greater cost efficiencies from using 
electronic matching systems instead of floor-based manual trading systems. 
These technologies also decreased costs and increased efficiencies for the dealers 
and arbitrageurs who provide much of the liquidity offered at exchanges. Com -
petition forced them to pass along much of the benefits of their new technologies 
to buy-side traders in the form of narrower spreads quoted for larger sizes. New 
electronic buy-side order management systems also decreased buy-side trading 
costs by allowing a smaller number of buy-side traders to process more orders 
and to process them more efficiently than manual traders.
While electronic trading has had a significant effect on equity markets, it has not 
had as much of an effect on the markets for corporate and municipal bonds. The 
market structures of corporate and municipal bond markets have hardly changed 
since the late 19th century. Despite the efforts of many creative developers of 
electronic bond trading systems, most public investors in these markets still trade 
largely over the counter with dealers.
7. C is correct. The speed required by electronic traders is affected by fast commu -
nication and fast computations. The shorter the distance between the trader and 
the exchange, the faster the communication. Many exchanges allow electronic 
traders to place their servers in the rooms where the exchange servers operate, a 
practice called collocation.
8. B is correct. Many trading problems are ideally suited for machine learning 
analyses because the problems repeat regularly and often. For such problems, 
machine-based learning systems can be extraordinarily powerful. However, these 
systems are often useless—or worse—when trading becomes extraordinary, as 
when volatilities shoot up. Machine learning systems frequently do not produce 
useful information during volatility episodes because they have few precedents 
from which the machines can learn. Thus, traders often instruct their electronic 
trading systems to stop trading—and sometimes to close out their positions—
whenever they recognize that they are entering uncharted territory. Many traders 
shut down when volatility spikes—both because high-volatility episodes are 
uncommon and thus not well understood and because even if such episodes were 
well understood, they represent periods of exceptionally high risk.
9. C is correct. Both suggestions will likely be effective in minimizing the systemic 
risk introduced by electronic trading. First, exhaustive testing of the algorithm 
prior to its launch can minimize risk relating to programming errors, which 
could result in an extreme market reaction that could trigger an even more ex -
treme market reaction. Second, imposing mandatory trade halts in case of large 
price changes (outside a given threshold) would limit potential undesired results 
and help minimize systemic risk.
10. A is correct. Rumormongering is the dissemination of false information about 
fundamental values or about other traders’ trading intentions in an attempt to 
alter investors’ value assessments. Martin’s suggested news validation rule would 
reduce the likelihood that SAMN would be adversely affected by this market 
manipulation strategy.
11. C is correct. Both of Riley’s comments are correct. Electronic algorithmic trading 
techniques, such as liquidity aggregation and smart order routing, help traders 
manage the challenges and opportunities presented by fragmentation. Liquidity 
aggregators create “super books” that present liquidity across markets for a given 
instrument. These tools offer global views of market depth (available liquidity) for 
each instrument regardless of the trading venue that offers the liquidity. Smart 
Learning Module 6 Trading Costs and Electronic Markets 452
order-routing algorithms send orders to the markets that display the best quot -
ed prices and sizes. Additionally, with increasing market fragmentation, traders 
filling large orders adapt their trading strategies to search for liquidity across 
multiple venues and across time to control the market impacts of their trades.
12. B is correct. Bloomfield noticed a pattern of trading in BYYP and decided to front 
run shares on the assumption that a trader is in the market filling a large buy 
order by breaking it into pieces. Electronic front runners trade in front of traders 
who demand liquidity. They identify when large traders or many small traders 
are trying to fill orders on the same side of the market. The order anticipation 
strategies of electronic front runners try to identify predictable patterns in order 
submission. They may search for patterns in order submissions, trades, or the 
relations between trades and other events.
A is incorrect because electronic arbitrageurs look across markets for arbitrage 
opportunities in which they can buy an undervalued instrument and sell a similar 
overvalued one. His decision to purchase BYYP shares is based on the pattern of 
trading that Bloomfield observed.
C is incorrect because quote matchers trade in front of traders who supply (not 
demand) liquidity. Bloomfield decides to purchase BYYP shares on the assump -
tion that a trader is in the market seeking (not supplying) liquidity, which is con -
sistent with front running (not quote matching). Quote matchers trade in front 
of traders who supply liquidity and try to exploit the option values of standing 
orders. Quote matchers buy when they believe they can rely on standing buy 
orders to get out of their positions, and they sell when they can do the same with 
standing sell orders.
13. B is correct. The effective spread is calculated as follows:
  Effective spread = 2   ×     (  Trade price   −  Midpoint of market at time of order entry  )     
  Effective spread of Trade 1 = 2   ×     (  $41.50   −  $41.475 )     =  $0.05 
  Effective spread of Trade 2 = 2   ×     (  $41.75   −  $41.74 )     =  $0.02 
  Average Effective Spread  =     (  $0.05 + $0 .02 )     / 2 = $0.035 
14. A is correct. Flickering quotes are exposed limit orders that electronic traders 
submit and then cancel shortly thereafter, often within a second. Electronic deal -
ers and algorithmic buy-side traders submit and repeatedly cancel and resubmit 
their orders when they do not want their orders to stand in the market; rather, 
they want other traders to see that they are willing to trade at the displayed price. 
Bloomfield does not want his orders to stand in the market; using flickering 
quotes to purchase AXZ shares would satisfy that objective.
B is incorrect because AXZ shares are currently in a period of high volatili -
ty, so Bloomfield would not likely use machine learning to execute his trades. 
Machine-learning systems frequently do not produce useful information during 
volatility episodes because these episodes have few precedents from which 
the machines can learn. Machine-learning methods produce models based on 
observed empirical regularities rather than on theoretical principles identi -
fied by analysts. Many traders shut down when volatility spikes, both because 
high-volatility episodes are uncommon and thus not well understood and 
because even if such episodes were well understood, they represent periods of 
exceptionally high risk.
C is incorrect because market participants use leapfrogging quotes when spreads 
are wide (not narrow), and Bloomfield noted that the bid–ask spread for AXZ 
shares is narrow. When bid–ask spreads are wide, dealers often are willing to 
Solutions 453
trade at better prices than they quote. They quote wide spreads because they 
hope to trade at more favorable prices. When another trader quotes a better 
price, dealers often immediately quote an even better price. If the spread is suffi -
ciently wide, a game of leapfrog may ensue as the dealer jumps ahead again.
15. B is correct. To reduce the systemic risks associated with fast trading, some ex -
changes have adopted trade halts when prices move too quickly. These rules stop 
trading when excess demand for liquidity occurs. They also prevent the extreme 
price changes that can occur in electronic markets when market orders arrive 
and no liquidity is present. 2Fast Trading’s competitive advantage will be main -
tained despite exchange trading halts because the company will be free to trade 
faster than its competitors once trading resumes. Therefore, exchanges using 
trade halts to stop trading is the risk reduction strategy that most likely maintains 
2Fast Trading’s competitive advantage and is consistent with Bloomfield’s claim 
that risks can be reduced by changing the structure of the market.
A is incorrect because delaying order processing by random intervals reduces the 
benefits of high-frequency traders being faster than their competitors and invest -
ing in speed. Therefore, delaying order processing by random order intervals does 
not maintain 2Fast Trading’s primary competitive advantage, which is trading 
faster than competitors, because that advantage will be reduced.
C is incorrect because slowing markets by running call markets once a sec -
ond or more often instead of trading continuously diminishes the benefits of 
high-frequency traders being faster than their competitors and investing with 
speed. Therefore, slowing markets once a second or more often instead of trading 
continuously does not maintain 2Fast Trading’s primary competitive advantage, 
which is trading faster than competitors, because that advantage will be reduced.
16. A is correct. Bluffing involves submitting orders and arranging trades to influence 
other traders’ perceptions of value. Bluffers often prey on momentum traders, 
who buy when prices are rising and sell when prices are falling. Similarly, Bloom -
field mentioned that regulators were informed that 2Fast’s competitor has been 
submitting orders and arranging trades to influence other traders’ perceptions of 
value; regulators were informed the competitor has been buying stock to raise its 
price, thereby encouraging momentum traders to buy, and then selling the stock 
to them at higher prices.
B is incorrect because the competitor did not use standing limit orders—those 
orders that are used in a spoofing strategy—for the trades the regulator is 
investigating. Spoofing is a trading practice in which traders place exposed 
standing limit orders to convey an impression to other traders that the market is 
more liquid than it is or to suggest to other traders that the security is under- or 
overvalued.
C is incorrect because the competitor did not use commonly controlled 
accounts—those accounts that are used in a wash trading strategy—for the trades 
that regulators are investigating. Wash trading consists of trades arranged among 
commonly controlled accounts to create the impression of market activity at a 
particular price. The purpose of wash trading is to fool investors into believing 
that a market is more liquid than it truly is and to thereby increase investors’ con -
fidence both in their ability to exit positions without substantial cost and in their 
assessments of security values.

Case Study in Portfolio Management: 
Institutional (SWF)
by Steve Balaban, CFA, Arjan Berkelaar, PhD, CFA, Nasir Hasan, and 
Hardik Sanjay Shah, CFA.
Steve Balaban, CFA, is at Mink Capital Inc. (Canada). Arjan Berkelaar, PhD, CFA, is at 
KAUST Investment Management Company (USA). Nasir Hasan is at Ernst & Young (UAE). 
Hardik Sanjay Shah, CFA, is at GMO LLC (Singapore).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery The candidate should be able to:
discuss financial risks associated with the portfolio strategy of an 
institutional investor
discuss environmental and social risks associated with the portfolio 
strategy of an institutional investor
analyze and evaluate the financial and non-financial risk exposures in 
the portfolio strategy of an institutional investor
discuss various methods to manage the risks that arise on long-term 
direct investments of an institutional investor
evaluate strengths and weaknesses of an enterprise risk management 
system and recommend improvements
INTRODUCTION
The focus of this reading is a fictional “case study. ” The case itself will focus on the 
portfolio of a sovereign wealth fund (SWF) specifically looking at risk in terms of the 
SWF’s long-term investments. There are three Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) 
within the case. Prior to the case, we provide two LOS outside the case. These LOS 
will provide some background information that will be helpful to the candidate in 
understanding the case.1LEARNING MODULE
7
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 456
FINANCIAL RISKS FACED BY INSTITUTIONAL 
INVESTORS
discuss financial risks associated with the portfolio strategy of an 
institutional investor
Long-Term Perspective
Institutional investors (also referred to as asset owners ) such as pension funds, sover -
eign wealth funds, endowments, and foundations are distinct from other institutional 
investors such as banks and insurance companies in terms of the time horizon over 
which they invest their assets. This long-term perspective allows these institutions to 
take on certain investment risks that other institutional investors simply cannot bear 
and to invest in in a broad range of alternative asset classes, including private equity, 
private real estate, natural resources, infrastructure, and hedge funds. This section 
will focus on the financial risks associated with the portfolio strategy of long-term 
institutional investors and in particular will focus on investments in illiquid asset 
classes. Banks and insurance companies are excluded from the discussion because 
they are typically much more asset/liability focused and face much tighter regulatory 
constraints to ensure capital adequacy.
This section will not cover the quantitative aspects of risk management or the 
mechanics behind various risk metrics, such as standard deviation and conditional value 
at risk, or risk management techniques, such as Monte Carlo simulation and factor 
modelling. Those topics are covered in other parts of the CFA Program curriculum. 
Instead, this reading will cover key risk considerations faced by long-term institutional 
investors as they invest in a range of traditional and alternative asset classes, including 
private equity and infrastructure. An important distinguishing feature of long-term 
institutional investors is their ability to invest in illiquid asset classes. Since the late 
1990s, such asset classes have become an ever more important part of the investment 
portfolios of pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and foundations. 
In this reading, we put particular emphasis on the financial risks that emanate from 
illiquid investments because these risks tend to be least well quantified but can pose 
an existential threat to long-term investors if not addressed and managed carefully. 
The focus is on how market and liquidity risk interact to create potential challenges 
at the overall portfolio level and affect the institutional investor’s ability to meet its 
long-term objectives.
Section 2.2 briefly discusses the various lenses through which risk management can 
be viewed. Risk management is a very broad topic, and the goal is to simply provide 
the reader with a frame of reference. Section 2.3 focuses on the key financial risks 
that institutional investors face. The focus is on portfolio-level, top-down, long-term 
financial risk. Risk management for long-term institutional investors should primarily 
be concerned with events that may jeopardize the organization’s ability to meet its 
long-term objectives. The interaction between market and liquidity risk plays a criti -
cal role. In Section 2.4 we discuss the challenges associated with investing in illiquid 
asset classes from a risk management perspective. We discuss two important aspects 
of illiquid asset classes: the uncertainty of cash flows and return-smoothing behavior 
in the return pattern. Section 2.5 describes how institutional investors address and 
manage liquidity risk at the overall portfolio level.2
Financial Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 457
Dimensions of Financial Risk Management
The aim of risk management is to avoid an existential threat to the organization. In 
other words, risk management should focus on what types of events can jeopardize 
the organization’s ability to meet its long-term objectives. Existential threats can 
arise from both financial risks (e.g., market losses and liquidity risk in the form of the 
inability to meet cash flows) and non-financial risks (e.g., reputational risks). In this 
reading, we solely focus on financial risk. Financial risk needs to be viewed through 
multiple lenses. There is no simple template to financial risk management. It is not 
simply a matter of calculating, for example, the value at risk of a portfolio. There are 
several dimensions to sound financial risk management, and we cover them briefly 
in the following subsections. Our goal is to simply provide a frame of reference for 
the reader because risk management is a very broad topic.
Top-down vs. bottom-up risk analysis
Risk management requires both a top-down and a bottom-up perspective. From a 
top-down perspective, the board and chief investment officer (CIO) set overall risk 
guidelines for the portfolio that serve as guardrails within which the investment 
team is expected to operate. Risk management involves measuring, monitoring, and 
reporting portfolio results versus the guidelines. The investment team is tasked with 
implementing the overall investment strategy either through hiring external asset 
managers or by directly purchasing and managing securities and assets. The investment 
team takes a more bottom-up, sub-portfolio approach to managing the risks of each 
individual portfolio or asset class, while assessing and monitoring their interaction 
and impact on the risk level of the overall portfolio.
Portfolio-level risk vs. asset-class-specific risk
Although risk management for an institutional investor is ultimately about controlling 
overall portfolio-level risk, risks also need to be managed and controlled at the 
asset-class or strategy level so that no particular asset class or strategy will have an 
undue adverse effect on the overall portfolio. Different asset classes require different 
risk management techniques. Some risk metrics and methods make sense for publicly 
traded asset classes, but they may not be meaningful when assessing the risk of, for 
example, illiquid asset classes or hedge fund investments. For some asset classes, such 
as public equities, detailed security-level information might be available, whereas 
for other asset classes, such as hedge funds, only monthly manager returns may be 
available. In the case of a public equity portfolio, risk analysis might be very granular 
and rely on sophisticated factor models, whereas risk analysis for hedge fund invest -
ments might simply involve calculating the historical volatility of observed returns. 
Because of differences in data transparency, data frequency, and risk methods used, it 
is difficult—if not impossible—to aggregate these results at the overall portfolio level. 
It is not uncommon for institutional investors to have an overall risk management 
system for portfolio-wide risk metrics in addition to asset-class-specific systems or 
approaches that provide a more in-depth risk view tailored to a particular asset class.
Return-based vs. holdings-based risk approaches
Financial risk management systems are typically described as being return based (risk 
estimation relies on the historical return streams of an external manager or a portfolio 
of securities) or holdings based (risk estimation relies on individual security holdings 
and the historical returns of those securities in the portfolio). Both approaches have 
their pros and cons, and they are not mutually exclusive. Return-based systems are 
relatively easy to implement but may produce risk estimates that are biased because 
they rely on past returns from a strategy that may be very different today compared 
with, for example, five years ago. Holdings-based risk systems, in contrast, tend to 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 458
be more costly and time-consuming to implement. For many institutional investors 
that invest in hedge funds and illiquid asset classes, holdings-based risk systems for 
the entire portfolio are typically not feasible because of a lack of transparency on 
holdings and their related investment strategy (a multi-strategy fund may maintain a 
long position in a security within one strategy book and a short position in another 
strategy book), data being available with a one-month to three-month lag, and sig -
nificant turnover in certain types of hedge fund investments.
Absolute vs. relative risk
Investors are interested in both absolute risk and relative risk. Absolute risk concerns 
the potential for overall losses and typically relies on overall portfolio-level metrics, 
such as standard deviation, conditional value at risk, and maximum drawdown. Relative 
risk concerns underperformance versus policy benchmarks and relies on such metrics 
as tracking error (the standard deviation of returns relative to a benchmark).
Long-term vs. short-term risk metrics
Modern risk systems used by institutional investors typically focus on calculating 
volatility, value at risk, and conditional value at risk using sophisticated risk factor 
techniques. Given the heavy reliance on the current portfolio composition and the 
granular modeling of each component in the portfolio, these risk systems are most 
useful in providing an estimate for the potential for near-term losses. Institutional 
investors are also interested in calculating longer-term risks, such as the probability 
of losses, the probability of not being able to meet cash flows, and the probability of 
maintaining purchasing power or meeting a certain return target over longer time 
periods, such as 5 years, 10 years, 20 years, and so forth.
These long-term risk metrics are typically calculated using Monte Carlo simulation, 
where asset-class returns are simulated on the basis of a set of forward-looking capital 
market assumptions (typically expected returns, volatilities, and correlations) and total 
assets are calculated including cash flows, such as benefit payments and contributions 
in the case of pension funds and payouts (spending amounts) in case of endowments 
and foundations. These methods, although typically much less granular than a risk 
management system, are better able to incorporate future portfolio changes, different 
rebalancing methods, and cash flows.
Quantitative vs. qualitative risks
At the end of the day, risk management is not simply a quantitative endeavor. 
Quantitative risk management techniques are backward looking by nature and typically 
parametric (i.e., they rely on historical data to estimate parameters). Although history 
can serve as a guide, it does not provide a prediction of the future. Risk management 
is about assessing the potential for future losses, and quantitative tools need to be 
complemented with qualitative assessments. However, with qualitative assessments, 
it is important for risk managers to be aware of their own biases because they are 
basing these assessments on their own past experience. Thus, it is important for risk 
managers to recognize and mitigate the backward-looking bias in both quantitative 
(explicit) and qualitative (implicit) risk analysis.
Pre- and post-investment risk assessment
Finally, although risk management efforts typically focus on measuring the risks of 
existing investments, a sound risk management philosophy ensures a proper assess -
ment of financial risks prior to making investments. Institutional investors typically 
put a lot of effort into operational and investment due diligence prior to making 
investments. In addition to analyzing past investment performance, it is critical 
when hiring external managers to evaluate the character of the key decision makers, 
Financial Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 459
the business ethics of the firm, the investment experience of the team, the quality 
of operations (such as accounting and trade settlements), and the risk management 
practices of the external manager. As part of their investment due diligence, insti -
tutional investors also look at the quality of the non-executive directors of the fund, 
the integrity and independence of external auditors, fee structures, master fund and 
feeder fund structure, custodians, and safekeeping on assets. These considerations are 
even more important for illiquid investments because it is very difficult to exit from 
them (investors cannot easily change their mind). After investing, risk management 
might take on a more quantitative role, but continued due diligence and monitoring 
are of equal importance. In the case of external managers, this obligation resides with 
the team responsible for the hiring and firing of the managers. In the case of internal 
management, an in-house risk management team may be tasked with the ongoing 
due-diligence and monitoring responsibilities.
The various risk dimensions we have described should provide a sense of the 
wide-ranging nature of risk management as a discipline. For this reading, we focus 
exclusively on the key financial risks that long-term institutional investors face. We 
take a portfolio-level, top-down perspective and are primarily concerned with how 
illiquid asset classes and the interaction between market and liquidity risk affect an 
institutional investor’s ability to meet its long-term objectives. This risk is unique 
to long-term institutional investors. The next section will provide a more in-depth 
description of this risk.
Risk Considerations for Long-Term Investors
Long-term institutional investors have the ability to invest a significant part of their 
portfolio in risky and illiquid assets because of their long-term investment horizon 
and relatively low liquidity needs. The past two decades have seen a steady increase 
in the allocation to illiquid asset classes, such private equity, private real estate, and 
infrastructure, by pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and founda -
tions. These asset classes create unique risk management challenges and can pose 
an existential threat if the risks are not addressed and managed carefully. As stated 
before, the ultimate objective of risk management is to ensure that the organization 
survives and can meet its long-term objectives.
We start with briefly describing and reviewing the main objectives of long-term 
institutional investors and their key risk considerations. Exhibit 1  provides an overview 
by institutional investor type. The ultimate risk consideration for each of these insti -
tutional investors is their ability to meet the payouts that they were set up to provide. 
This risk is largely affected by how the overall investment portfolio performs over time. 
On the one hand, a very low-risk portfolio that consists primarily of fixed-income 
investments is unlikely to cause a problem in providing the required payouts in the 
short run but will almost certainly jeopardize the organization’s ability to provide the 
required payouts in the long run. On the other hand, a very risky and illiquid portfolio 
is expected to provide high expected returns in the long run but could cause signif -
icant pain in the short run during a significant market downturn or financial crisis. 
Long-term institutional investors aim to strike the right balance between these two 
extremes in designing their investment policy or strategic asset allocation.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 460
Exhibit 1: Objectives and Risk Considerations by Institutional Investor Type
Institutional Investor Main Objective Key Risk Consideration
Pension funds Provide retirement income 
to plan participantsInability to meet pension 
payouts to beneficiaries
Sovereign wealth funds Varies by type of SWF 
but most have been set 
up to provide some future 
financial support to the 
governmentInability to provide financial 
support to the government
Endowments and 
FoundationsProvide financial support in 
perpetuity while maintain -
ing intergenerational equityInability to provide financial 
support to the institution or 
to the mission
This process usually involves a Monte Carlo simulation exercise where asset-class 
returns are simulated on the basis of a set of forward-looking capital market assump -
tions and total assets are calculated including cash flows, such as benefit payments and 
contributions in the case of pension funds and payouts (spending amounts) in the case 
of endowments and foundations. Monte Carlo simulation allows institutional investors 
to calculate such metrics as the probability of maintaining purchasing power and the 
probability of a certain loss or drawdown (e.g., 25%) over a specific time period (e.g., 
5 or 10 years) and to determine the appropriate trade-off between two such metrics. 
What is often ignored in this type of analysis, however, is the important interaction 
between potential market losses and liquidity. Pension funds, SWFs, endowments, and 
foundations are unique in that they can often tolerate significantly more market and 
liquidity risk than other investors. Their long-term investment horizon allows them 
to survive a significant market correction and even operate in a counter-cyclical way 
during a market crisis. As institutional investors invest more in such illiquid asset 
classes as private equity, private real estate, and infrastructure, however, their ability 
to tolerate market losses may diminish.
Institutional investors need liquidity to meet payouts (retirement payments in 
the case of pension plans, payouts to the university or foundation in the case of 
endowments and foundations, etc.), meet capital calls on their illiquid investments, 
and rebalance their portfolios. During a significant market downturn, these needs can 
become stretched and impact the institution’s ability to meet cash flows, particularly if 
a large part of the portfolio is invested in illiquid asset classes, such as private equity, 
real estate, and infrastructure. Exhibit 2  shows the main liquidity needs and the main 
sources of liquidity for long-term institutional investors. Each of these liquidity needs 
and sources may be adversely affected during a financial crisis.
Exhibit 2: Liquidity Needs and Sources for Institutional Investors
Liquidity Needs Liquidity Sources
Outflows (e.g., pension payouts to bene -
ficiaries, university payouts, and financial 
support to the government)Inflows (e.g., pension contributions, gifts, 
donations, government savings)
Capital calls for illiquid investments Distributions from illiquid investments
Portfolio rebalancing Investment income and proceeds from sell -
ing liquid asset classes (cash, fixed income, 
public equities)
Financial Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 461
We first start with discussing how liquidity needs may increase during a crisis. First, 
payouts might increase as the beneficiary requires additional financial support. For 
example, a university may need additional funds from its endowment to support its 
operations as other sources of income dry up, or a government might require addi -
tional financial support from the sovereign wealth fund to mitigate the crisis situa -
tion. Second, there might be an acceleration of capital calls as attractive investment 
opportunities present themselves during a crisis. Finally, rebalancing flows will be 
more significant during a crisis because of significant market movements. Good gov -
ernance and best practice suggest that investors rebalance their portfolios at regular 
intervals. Sticking to rebalancing practices is particularly important during a financial 
crisis because failure to rebalance may prevent investors from fully participating in 
the rebound after the crisis.
Having discussed how the needs for liquidity may increase during a significant 
market downturn, we next turn to how sources of liquidity might dry up under those 
circumstances. First, inflows might decrease in a crisis. For example, donors might 
be struggling financially and donate less to their alma mater, or plan sponsors might 
be faced with budgetary challenges and, therefore, less inclined to contribute to the 
pension fund. Second, distributions from illiquid investments might be reduced because 
there are no attractive exit points due to depressed prices or lower profitability. Finally, 
investments that are otherwise liquid might become less liquid or simply undesirable 
to exit from. The main sources of liquidity during a financial crisis are typically cash 
and fixed-income investments. And most long-term institutional investors hold rel -
atively low allocations to cash and fixed income in their portfolios.
Illiquid asset classes (such as private equity, real estate, and infrastructure) are 
not available to meet liquidity needs during a crisis. These asset classes cannot be 
rebalanced or redeemed because they are long term in nature and the assets can be 
locked up for 5–10 years or even longer. Semi-liquid asset classes, such as hedge fund 
investments, should not be expected to be liquid and available to meet liquidity needs 
during a financial crisis because many of these managers might impose redemption 
gates or have lockups in place or their investments might turn out to be less liquid 
than anticipated. Finally, although public equity investments are technically liquid, 
investors may be reluctant to sell part of their public equity portfolio to meet liquidity 
needs because the market value of these investments may have gone down signifi -
cantly in a crisis. In addition, investors might not want to redeem from certain active 
external managers, even if the investments are liquid, because it may impact the future 
relationship with that manager (particularly for high-demand active managers with 
limited available capacity).
In conclusion, the main risk that long-term institutional investors face is having 
insufficient liquidity during a significant market downturn to meet their obligations 
and rebalance their portfolios. Liquidity needs tend to increase in a crisis while sources 
of liquidity dry up. This risk increases as institutional investors allocate more to 
illiquid asset classes. The combination of financial losses and not being able to meet 
cash flows or rebalance the portfolio because of insufficient liquidity can become 
a matter of survival. Managing this risk is, therefore, very important for long-term 
institutional investors. In the next section, we will discuss in more detail the risks 
associated with illiquid asset classes. In Section 2.5, we will discuss the various ways 
in which institutional managers manage liquidity risk.
Risks Associated with Illiquid Asset Classes
Illiquid asset classes, such as private equity, real estate, and infrastructure, offer the 
potential for returns in excess of those on publicly traded asset classes, such as public 
equity and fixed income. The higher expected return of these asset classes comes at 
a cost to investors in the form of illiquidity. Illiquid asset classes are typically subject 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 462
to a drawdown structure where committed capital is called at an unknown schedule 
and investors receive profits at an unknown schedule. As a result, investors need to 
hold sufficient liquid assets to meet capital calls from their private fund managers. 
The uncertain pattern of cash flows poses both a liquidity and a risk management 
challenge for investors in illiquid asset classes.
In addition to the importance of adequately managing liquidity needs when 
investing in illiquid assets, these asset classes tend to be subject to stale pricing, 
appraisal-based valuations, and a lagged response to movements in public markets. 
As a result, illiquid asset classes exhibit returns that are smooth, understating the 
true volatility and correlation with publicly traded asset classes. For example, the 
standard deviation of observed returns for private equity is often smaller than that 
of public equity. Although this feature may be appealing for institutional investors, it 
causes traditional asset allocation models, such as mean–variance optimization, to 
over-allocate to private asset classes because the Sharpe ratios of observed returns 
are superior to those of publicly traded asset classes.
Finally, illiquid asset classes cannot be rebalanced easily and costlessly. Although 
investors could potentially, for example, sell their private equity stakes in the second -
ary market, this cannot be done instantaneously and investors may have to accept a 
significantly lower price compared with the true market value.
Cash flow modeling
Illiquid asset classes are subject to a drawdown structure. The investor (typically the 
limited partner, or LP , in the partnership agreement) commits capital, and this capital 
gets drawn down over time at the discretion of the general partner, or GP . Investors 
need to figure out both the commitment strategy (i.e., how much to commit each 
year) to reach a certain target allocation to illiquid assets and the liquidity needs to 
meet capital calls when required. Committing too much can pose severe liquidity 
risk because the percentage allocation to illiquid asset classes may soar due to the 
so-called denominator effect (total assets under management, or AUM, falls by a 
larger amount than the repricing of illiquid asset classes). Committing too little may 
prevent the investor from reaching the target allocation and may result in falling short 
of return expectations.
In managing liquidity needs and determining the appropriate commitment strategy 
to illiquid asset classes, investors need to be able to predict future cash flows.
Addressing return smoothing behavior of illiquid asset classes
To calculate the true underlying economic risks of illiquid asset classes as part of their 
risk management efforts, institutional investors typically use one of two approaches: 
(1) Use public market proxies in place of private asset classes—for example, use 
small-cap public equities as a proxy for private equity—or (2) unsmooth observed 
returns of private asset classes. The objective of the latter is to remove the serial 
correlation structure of the original return series. The implicit assumption is that the 
serial correlations in reported returns are entirely due to the smoothing behavior funds 
engage in when reporting results. A common and simple technique to unsmooth the 
returns of illiquid asset classes and hedge funds is a method developed by Geltner 
(1993)  to address appraisal-based valuations in real estate. The method proposed by 
Geltner removes only the first-order serial correlation in observed returns. Okunev 
and White (2003)  extended the method of Geltner (1993)  to include higher-order serial 
correlations. An alternative to the Geltner method is the GLM method proposed by 
Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004) . They assumed that observed returns for illiquid 
asset classes and hedge funds follow a moving-average process.
To show the effect of these different methods on the annualized volatility of vari -
ous illiquid asset classes, we use quarterly historical returns for global buyouts, global 
venture capital, global private real estate, and global private natural resources for the 
Financial Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 463
period from Q1 1990 until Q4 2019. Exhibit 3  shows the annualized volatility of the 
observed returns and the volatility of adjusted returns using the three methods briefly 
discussed earlier. For the Okunev–White and GLM methods, we use up to four lags. 
Exhibit 4  shows the beta to global equity returns. For global equity returns, we use 
quarterly returns for the MSCI World Index from 1990 to 2019.
Exhibit 3: Impact of Unsmoothing on Annualized Volatility
Annualized Volatility (%)
11 1021
918
1539
15 161441
17 191748
16
0102030405060
Natural R esour ces Buyout sV enture Capital Real Es tate
Observed GLM Geltner Okunev-White
Source :  Data is from Cambridge Associates.
Exhibit 4: Impact of Unsmoothing on Beta to Public Equities
Beta to Public Equities
0.20.40.5
0.20.50.71.1
0.30.40.61.2
0.30.50.81.3
0.31.6
Natural R esour ces Buyout sV enture Capital Real Es tate0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4
Observed GLM Geltner Okunev-White
Source :  Data is from Cambridge Associates.
As illustrated in Exhibit 3  and Exhibit 4 , after applying unsmoothing techniques, the 
resulting returns exhibit higher volatility and are typically more correlated with public 
equity markets. These unsmoothed return series can then be used along with returns 
on publicly traded asset classes to determine the covariance matrix to be used in a 
mean–variance optimization exercise when determining the appropriate allocation 
to illiquid asset classes and hedge funds. Mean–variance optimization, however, still 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 464
falls short as an adequate asset allocation tool for institutional investors because it is 
not able to take into account the illiquid nature of some asset classes. Illiquid asset 
classes cannot be rebalanced easily without a potential significant price concession. 
Single-period optimization methods, such as mean–variance optimization, fail when 
illiquid asset classes are introduced, because such techniques implicitly assume that 
investors keep portfolio weights constant over time (i.e., portfolio weights are rebal -
anced perfectly) and they ignore the drawdown structure of illiquid asset classes and 
the uncertainty of cash flows. Currently, there are not any widely accepted alternatives. 
Most investors simply constrain the allocations to illiquid asset classes in the mean–
variance optimization to achieve reasonable and practical portfolios.
Direct vs. fund investments in illiquid asset classes
In recent years, large pension funds and sovereign wealth funds have increasingly 
opted to invest directly in illiquid asset classes rather than through the more typical 
limited partner (LP)–general partner (GP) setup. Some large pension funds and SWFs 
have built up a large team of merchant banking professionals who are equally capable 
as a large private equity fund team. The main motivation behind such a move is to 
save on the high fees that institutional investors typically pay to GPs (2% base fee on 
committed capital and 20% fee on profits or over a certain hurdle rate). Being able to 
save on these fees should make the investments more profitable over the long term. 
Direct investments provide an institutional investor with control over each individual 
investment. This situation puts the investor in a better position to manage liquidity. 
In the case of direct investments, there are no unfunded commitments, making it 
easier to manage capital. The investor also has full discretion over the decision when 
to exit investments and will not have to be forced to sell in a down market. As a 
result, direct investments partially alleviate some of the liquidity challenges typically 
associated with private asset classes and resolve some of the principal–agent issues 
associated with fund investing.
There are also disadvantages to direct investments in private asset classes. Direct 
investments in private equity, real estate, or infrastructure require a dedicated and 
experienced in-house team.  In some instances, rather than building out an in-house 
team for private investments, large pension funds and sovereign wealth funds acquire 
a general partner. For example, Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan purchased Cadillac 
Fairview, a large operating company for real estate.  Managing and assembling an 
in-house team adds several challenges compared with the more nimble setup in the 
case of fund investing. The sourcing of deals may be constrained by the talent and 
network of the in-house team. As a result, it may be more difficult to diversify the 
portfolio across geography and industries. Direct investment portfolios may have 
higher concentration risk because direct investors opt for larger investments due to 
staffing issues and scalability. This risk could adversely affect the liquidity of these 
investments because they might be harder to sell and, therefore, potentially less liquid. 
If the investor relies on external managers for deal sourcing or a partnership agree -
ment, there is a risk of adverse selection. Finally, the governance structure is not set 
up as well in the case of direct investing compared with fund investments. In contrast 
to fund managers, employees of a pension fund or sovereign wealth fund may not be 
able to sit on the board of a private company. Institutional investors may not be able 
to afford the liability issues associated with direct investing. For fund investments, the 
investor is a limited partner and has limited liability, whereas with direct investments, 
the investor may be considered a general partner, with additional liability risks. Finally, 
institutional investors may find it difficult to adequately compensate internal staff to 
ensure that they hire and retain talent. This is usually a problem for public pension 
funds because there is public pressure to keep compensation down.
Financial Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 465
Managing Liquidity Risk
In this section, we discuss some of the tools used by institutional investors to manage 
overall liquidity risk in their portfolios.
Liquidity management steps:
1. Establish liquidity risk parameters.
Institutional investors typically create liquidity guidelines regarding what 
percentage of assets needs to be liquid and available on a daily or monthly 
basis. In addition, given the drawdown structure of illiquid asset classes, 
institutional investors need to keep track of uncalled commitments, not 
simply invested capital. It is typical for institutional investors to have inter -
nal guidelines or bands around the sum of invested capital and uncalled 
commitments as a percentage of total assets. In addition to such bands, they 
may have automatic or semiautomatic escalation triggers, such as reducing 
commitments to illiquid asset classes or even actively seeking to reduce 
investments through secondary sales once the sum of invested capital plus 
uncalled commitments reaches a certain level (expressed as a percentage 
of total assets). These liquidity risk parameters can either be internal or be 
included in an investment policy statement approved by the board.
2. Assess the liquidity of the current portfolio and how it evolves over 
time.
The second step in managing liquidity risk at the overall portfolio level is 
to have a clear sense of the liquidity of the portfolio and measure liquidity 
parameters versus guidelines. Most institutional investors have an internal 
report that shows what percentage of the portfolio can be liquidated within 
a day, within a week, within a month, within a quarter, and within a year and 
what percentage of the portfolio takes more than a year to be liquidated. It is 
important not only to have a snapshot of that report at a given point in time 
but also to understand how it evolves over time as the portfolio changes. A 
good starting point for developing these statistics is to simply look at the 
legal terms that are in place with external managers. This is particularly 
relevant for active managers and hedge funds that have redemption notices 
and lockups included in the investment agreement. In the case of internal 
management, an even more granular assessment can be made depending 
on the types of securities being held and using market liquidity measures to 
gauge how much of these securities can be sold over different time frames 
during a financial crisis. As discussed in Section 2.3, investors may also want 
to take into account how redeeming from certain external managers during 
a crisis may impact the future relationship with that manager (in other 
words, they may not want to redeem even if the investments are liquid and 
instead include these investments in a less liquid category).
3. Develop a cash flow model and project future expected cash flows.
The third step is to understand and model the various cash flows. As dis -
cussed in Section 2.3, institutional investors make payouts (retirement pay -
ments, foundation spending, etc.), they receive inflows (gifts and donations 
for an endowment, pension contributions for a pension plan, etc.), they have 
to meet capital calls for illiquid asset classes and receive distributions, and 
they have to rebalance their portfolios. Most institutional investors model 
each of those cash flows and project future expected cash flows. Section 2.4 
briefly discussed how capital calls and distributions are modeled for illiquid 
asset classes.
4. Stress test liquidity needs and cash flow projections.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 466
The standard cash flow modeling and projections assume business as usual, 
but it is important to stress test these cash flow projections and liquid -
ity needs. As discussed in Section 2.4, cash flows are affected by market 
movements. For example, donations might be lower in a crisis and payouts 
might be higher. Institutional investors stress test their cash flow projec -
tions and liquidity needs. It is important to point out that this process is 
more of an art than a science and there is no universally accepted method 
for stress testing (as there are universally accepted methods for market risk 
calculations).
5. Put in place an emergency plan.
Finally, institutional investors should put in place an emergency action plan. 
Such an action plan should include what to liquidate—and in what order—in 
a crisis to meet cash flows and how to rebalance the portfolio in a crisis. 
Having such a plan in place can help avoid the risk of panicking in a crisis. 
Sharing the emergency action plan with the board to get buy-in can also 
help when a crisis occurs and mitigate the risk of board members pressuring 
the investment team to make sub-optimal short-term decisions.
Exhibit 5  summarizes the five steps in developing a liquidity management plan.
Exhibit 5: Liquidity Management Steps
1. Establish liquidity risk parameters.
2. Assess the liquidity of current portfolio, and monitor the evolution 
over time.
3. Develop a cash flow model and project future cash flows.
4. Stress test liquidity needs and cash flow projections.
5. Develop an emergency action plan.
Long-term institutional investors are able take on certain investment risks that 
other institutional investors simply cannot bear. Since the late 1990s, they have increas -
ingly invested in a broad range of alternative asset classes, including private equity, 
private real estate, natural resources, infrastructure, and hedge funds. In this reading, 
we focus on the financial risks that emanate from illiquid investments because these 
risks tend to be less well quantified but can pose an existential threat to long-term 
investors if not addressed and managed carefully. The focus has been on how market 
and liquidity risk interact to create potential challenges at the overall portfolio level 
and affect the institutional investor’s ability to meet its long-term objectives. We 
propose several steps institutional investors can take to better manage liquidity at 
the overall portfolio level.
Enterprise Risk Management for Institutional Investors
Exhibit 6  provides a high-level view of a risk management framework in an enterprise 
context:
Financial Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 467
Exhibit 6: Risk Management Framework in an Enterprise Context
Risk Drivers
Boar d Management
Goals Strategies
Risk 
Tolerance
Risk 
Budgeting
Policies & Pr ocesses(Allocate to) 
Risky Activities
Risk Exposur esIdentify Risks
Measur e Risks
Monitor RisksRisk Mitigation
& Management Establish Risk
Management
Infrastructur e 
Risks
in
Line? 
Reports
(Communications) 
Strategic
Analysis MODIFYRisk Governance
YESNO
Source:  “Risk Management: An Introduction, ” CFA Program Level I curriculum reading (2021).
We can apply this framework to the setting of an institutional investor in the following 
manner. The risk management process for an institutional investor starts with the 
board setting the overall risk tolerance for the organization that is consistent with 
its objectives and constraints. Risk tolerance should capture the amount of market 
risk that an institutional investor is willing and able to take in order to maximize 
expected returns, and it informs the most important investment decision that is made 
by the board—namely, the strategic asset allocation. Risk tolerance can be expressed 
in asset-only (for sovereign wealth funds, endowments, and foundations) or asset/
liability terms (for pension funds and insurance companies). Typical risk measures 
used for setting the risk tolerance of institutional investors include volatility, maxi -
mum drawdown, and value at risk or conditional value at risk (sometimes referred to 
as expected tail loss , or ETL ).
In addition to setting the overall risk tolerance (for market losses), the board usu -
ally approves additional risk parameters, limits, requirements, and guidelines (some 
quantitative and others procedural) that are codified in an investment policy state -
ment (IPS). These may include liquidity risk parameters if the institutional investor 
has a significant allocation to illiquid asset classes, an active risk budget to limit and 
control the amount of active management pursued by investment staff, restrictions on 
leverage and the use of derivatives, ethical investment guidelines, and possibly credit 
risk parameters and constraints in the case of significant fixed-income investments 
(for example, for an insurance company). These additional guidelines and constraints 
are put in place to ensure that the investment activities are consistent with the board’s 
risk tolerance and expectations (and with regulatory requirements if applicable).
Management (i.e., the investment team) is tasked with implementing the strategic 
asset allocation (SAA) and investing the assets either internally or through external 
managers across the various asset classes included in the SAA. The investment team 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 468
is also responsible for managing and monitoring the risks associated with the imple -
mentation of the SAA and reporting to the board. The objective is not to minimize or 
eliminate risk but to measure and attribute risk to various risk exposures and factors 
to ensure that the investments adequately compensate the institution for the risks 
being taken. Institutional investors typically perform risk factor analysis to better 
understand the fund’s risk exposures, such as exposure to equity risk, interest rate 
risk, credit risk, inflation risk, currency risk, and liquidity risk. This analysis includes 
both quantitative modeling and qualitative risk assessments. Quantitative tools may 
involve sophisticated risk management systems based on returns or holdings, scenario 
analysis, and stress testing. Other risks are more qualitative in nature, such as potential 
reputational risk from certain types of investments.
For public equity investments, active risk versus a benchmark needs to be mea -
sured and monitored. Institutional investors may have an explicit active risk budget 
in place. Part of the risk budgeting effort involves ensuring that the active risk budget 
accurately reflects the areas where most excess return can be expected. In addition, 
the investment team will want to ensure that most of the active risk in public equities 
comes from stock picking and not simply from loading on certain equity risk factors, 
such as growth, momentum, or quality.
For private equity investments, the board may want to understand whether the 
returns achieved on the investment adequately compensated the fund for giving up 
liquidity. One way to answer that question is by comparing the returns on the private 
equity investment with the return of public equities. Currency risk tends to sometimes 
be overlooked by institutional investors. This risk can have an outsized and unexpected 
impact on the overall return. Although currency risk can be hedged in some cases, 
doing so is typically costly or even impossible when investing in emerging and frontier 
markets. The risk of currency devaluation needs to be acknowledged and assessed 
prior to making investments. Another risk that gets overlooked is asset allocation drift. 
The investment portfolio should be rebalanced on a regular basis to bring it back in 
line with the strategic asset allocation that was approved by the board.
The risk management infrastructure of the institutional investor should be set up 
to identify and measure the aforementioned risks and monitor how they change over 
time and whether they are in line with the guidelines set up by the board in the IPS 
and with additional—more granular—internal guidelines set by the Chief Investment 
Officer and risk team. The risk team is usually tasked with risk reporting to the various 
stakeholders, which may include an internal investment committee and the board 
to ensure adequate risk oversight. The investment team should recognize when risk 
exposures are not aligned with the overall risk tolerance and guidelines and take action 
to bring them back into alignment. These actions may involve hedging, rebalancing, 
and secondary sales or in the case of illiquid investments, reducing commitments.
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS FACED BY 
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS
discuss environmental and social risks associated with the portfolio 
strategy of an institutional investor3
Environmental and Social Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 469
Universal Ownership, Externalities, and Responsible Investing
In this section, we define universal owners as large institutional investors that effectively 
own a slice of the whole economy and hence are generally managing their total market 
exposure, instead of focusing on a subset of issuers. Institutional investors such as 
sovereign wealth funds and public pension funds usually have large portfolios that are 
highly diversified and built with a long-term focus. Such portfolios are representative 
of global capital markets, thereby making such investors “universal owners. ”
Investing long term in widely diversified holdings inevitably exposes such portfo -
lios to increasing costs related to negative environmental and social externalities. An 
externality is an impact that an individual’s or a corporation’s activities have on a third 
party. If everyone acts in their own self-interest, it could lead to an overall negative 
outcome for society. Examples of negative environmental externalities include plastic 
pollution in the ocean, poor air quality due to industrial and vehicular emissions, and 
water toxicity due to improper effluent management.
Universal owners find it challenging to effectively diversify risks arising from 
negative environmental and social externalities. Costs that are externalized by one 
portfolio company can negatively affect the profitability of another portfolio company, 
thereby adversely affecting the overall portfolio return. For example, a sovereign wealth 
fund invests in a plastic manufacturer that is saving waste treatment and disposal 
costs by directly releasing waste pellets and other chemical residues into a nearby 
river. Water toxicity arising as a result of these actions causes reduced productivity 
in the agriculture operations downstream, which the asset owner is also invested 
in. In addition, strengthening regulations related to environmental protection, for 
example, may lead to monetary fines and penalties, thereby leading to financial risks 
for a company causing such negative externalities.
According to the UN-backed Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI), envi -
ronmental costs for universal owners are reflected in portfolio impacts via insur -
ance premiums, taxes, inflated input prices, and the physical costs associated with 
weather-related disasters (PRI Association 2017). Also, the cost of remediating envi -
ronmental damage is often significantly higher than the cost of preventing it. Given 
these facts, it is imperative for large institutional investors to internalize the price of 
such negative externalities by considering the impact of their investments on society 
and future generations.
Exhibit 7  provides a non-exhaustive list of environmental and social issues that 
we have introduced in Level I of the CFA Program curriculum.
Exhibit 7: Examples of Environmental and Social Factors
Environmental Issues Social Issues
Climate change and carbon emissions Customer satisfaction and product 
responsibility
Air and water pollution Data security and privacy
Biodiversity Gender and diversity
Deforestation Occupational health and safety
Energy efficiency Community relations and charitable 
activities
Waste management Human rights
Water scarcity Labor standards
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 470
In the next section, we share examples of how some of these environmental and social 
issues could impact the portfolio strategy for large institutional investors that have a 
long-term focus toward their investments.
Systemic risks have the potential to destabilize capital markets and lead to seri -
ous negative consequences for financial institutions and the broader economy. The 
unpredictable nature of such megatrends as climate change and their related impacts, 
both environmental and socioeconomic, pose clear systemic risks to global financial 
markets. A study carried out by researchers at the Grantham Research Institute on 
Climate Change and the Environment (2016)  at the London School of Economics and 
Political Science and Vivid Economics projected that climate change could reduce the 
value of global financial assets by as much as $24 trillion—resulting in permanent 
damage that would far eclipse that from the 2007–09 financial crisis.
Material Environmental Issues for an Institutional Investor
For an institutional investor, such as a sovereign wealth fund, such megatrends as 
climate change and their related risks—both physical and transition risks—have the 
potential to cause significant harm to a portfolio’s value over the medium to long 
term, particularly for investments in real assets (real estate, infrastructure) and pri -
vate equity, neither of which are easily divestible. Next, we will discuss the impact of 
climate-related risks on an institutional investor’s portfolio from the perspective of 
private equity and real asset investments.
Physical climate risks
As we have observed since the beginning of the current century, climate change has 
profoundly affected the physical world we live in. Annual average temperatures across 
the globe are continuously rising, and 19 of the 20 warmest years have occurred since 
2001 ( NASA 2019 ). Erratic weather patterns, such as heavy precipitation, droughts, 
and hurricanes, are both more frequent and of higher magnitude. Similarly, wildfires 
are causing more and more devastation every year. In addition, the chronic issue of 
sea-level rise is causing coastal flooding. As shown in Exhibit 8 , an increase in extreme 
weather events has occurred.
Exhibit 8: Extreme Weather Events on the Rise
0500010000150002000025000
1996–2005 2006–2015Deaths Due to
Droughts10x
0100
50200300
250
150400
350
1950–1983 1984–2017No. of Wildfire s
7x0100200300400500
1950–19 72 1973–1995 1996–2017No. of Extrem e
Temperature Events20x
050010001500200025003000
1950–1966 1967–1983 1984–2000 2001–2017No. of Floods15x
Source:  Emergency Events Database ( www  .emdat  .be).
Environmental and Social Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 471
With continued climate change, all these physical climate risks could become more 
severe in the future and, to a certain extent, become the new normal for the world. 
Depending on global responses to climate change in the coming decade, the degree 
of their impact on our economies and investments may be alleviated.
So, what does this mean for the portfolio strategy of large institutional investors 
with private equity and real asset investments?
Impact on real assets
Should these trends continue, the physical risks that we have discussed could create 
increased levels of stress on such assets as residential and commercial real estate 
and infrastructure, such as roads and railways. Rising sea levels that lead to flooding 
would impact both rents and property valuation for hitherto prime coastal properties. 
Prolonged exposure to extreme heat would negatively affect the useful life of roads 
and train tracks, which would lead to accelerated depreciation of such assets and, 
therefore, more frequent replacement costs for companies and governments (CFA 
Institute 2020).
Similarly, physical damage caused by frequent, large-scale weather-related events, 
such as hurricanes or even wildfires—once considered too irregular to insure against—
could not only lead to large-scale drawdowns in the portfolio’s asset value but also 
make it difficult or expensive to insure such assets. Most of the flooding-related losses 
around the world are uninsured, thereby causing additional stress on a country’s 
economy and its people (see Exhibit 9 ).
Exhibit 9: Global Flood Losses and Insurance Levels
020406080100120140160
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Insured UninsuredInsured vs.  Uninsured
USD Billions (inflation adjust ed to  2020)
Source:  Aon.
Because these physical climate-related risks continue to play out in a much larger and 
more frequent manner than previously anticipated, they will continue to bring down 
prices and rental yields of prime real estate, leading to permanent impairments of 
asset valuations. For a large institutional investor that is looking to preserve capital 
and provide growth benefits to multiple generations, it is imperative that these risks 
be factored into the portfolio construction strategies.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 472
Climate transition risks
In line with the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement, countries and companies around the 
world are already making efforts to dramatically reduce or eliminate their CO2 emis -
sions in order to limit the global temperature increase in this century to 2 degrees 
Celsius above preindustrial levels. To keep global warming less than 2°C, scientists 
project that energy-related CO2 emissions need to fall 25% by 2030 and reach “net 
zero” by 2070 ( Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2018 ; IEA 2020 ).
One of the most ambitious efforts to incentivize decarbonization is the European 
Union’s sustainable finance taxonomy, which helps investors understand whether an 
economic activity is environmentally sustainable. As of October 2020, looking at the 
scientific evidence about the current and potential impacts of climate change, it has 
become clear that the world needs to move toward a low-carbon future if we are to 
cap global warming at less than 2°C and prevent the negative effects that not doing 
so would bring to our climate, our ecosystems, and human life. What is currently 
unclear is the pace at which this decarbonization will happen.
Rapid decarbonization will lead to restrictions on carbon emissions, implementation 
of some form of carbon pricing, introduction of new technologies, and changes in the 
consumer behavior. All these effects can create massive disruptions in certain sectors, 
such as electricity generation (with the increasing cost competitiveness of renewable 
energy sources as compared with coal) and automobiles (with the impending wide -
spread switch from internal combustion engines to electric vehicles. The International 
Energy Agency has forecast that in order to reach carbon neutrality by 2050, half of 
all cars in the world should be electric by 2030 ( Lo 2020 ).
The PRI’s Inevitable Policy Response (IPR) project aims to prepare financial markets 
for climate-related policy risks that are likely to emerge in the short to medium term. 
The IPR forecast a response by 2025 that will be forceful, abrupt, and disorderly because 
of the delayed action (see Exhibit 10 ). The PRI argues that markets have inefficiently 
priced climate transition risks, but its policy forecast is that a forceful policy response 
to climate change in the near term is a highly likely outcome, leaving portfolios of 
institutional investors exposed to significant risks that need to be mitigated.
Environmental and Social Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 473
Exhibit 10: IPR Key Policy Forecasts
Coal phase-outsSales ban on Inter -
nal Combustion 
Engines (ICE)Carbon Pricing  
(Emission 
Allowances) Zero carbon power
Early coal phase-out 
for first mover coun -
tries by 2030Early sales ban for 
first mover countries 
by 2035US$40-80/tCO2 
prices by 2030 for 
first moversSignificant ramp-up 
of renewable energy 
globally
Steady retirement 
of coal-fired power 
generation after 
2030 in lagging 
countriesOther countries fol -
low suit as automo -
tive industry reaches 
tipping pointGlobal conver -
gence accelerated 
by Border Carbon 
Adjustment (BCA) 
to >=$100/tCO2 by 
2050Policy support of 
nuclear capacity 
increase in a small set 
of countries, nuclear 
phased out elsewhere
Carbon Capture 
and Storage 
(CCS) & industry 
decarbonisation Energy efficiencyGreen House Gas 
(GHG) removal 
(Land use-based) Agriculture
Limited CCS sup -
port in power,Increase in cover -
age and stringency 
of performance 
standardsImproved forestry 
and nature-based 
solutionsTechnical support to 
improve agricultural 
yields
Policy incentives pri -
marily for industrial 
and bioenergy CCSUtility obligation 
programsStronger enforce -
ment of zero 
deforestationIncreasing public 
investment in irriga -
tion and AgTech
Public support for 
demonstration, and 
then deployment of 
hydrogen clustersFinancial and behav -
ioral incentivesControlled expan -
sion of bioenergy 
cropsIncremental 
behavioural incen -
tives away from beef
Source:  PRI IPR (www  .unpri .org/ the -inevitable -policy  -response -policy  -forecasts/ 4849 .article).
Given the uncertainty around the precise timing and magnitude of the impact of 
climate change, organizations are increasingly using climate-related scenario analysis 
to better understand how their businesses might perform under a variety of global 
warming scenarios—for example, in a world that is 2°C, 3°C, or 4°C warmer. The Task 
force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) recommends organizations, 
including banks, asset managers, and asset owners, use scenario analysis to estimate 
the implications of such risks and opportunities for their businesses over time and 
also to inform their strategic thinking. The International Energy Agency and the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change both publicly offer a set of climate-related 
scenarios that are widely used. To learn more about climate-related scenario analysis, 
refer to the technical supplement issued by the TCFD.
Climate opportunities
Although most of the investor focus in dealing with climate change has been on 
managing physical and transition risks, exciting investment opportunities are arising 
in companies focused on climate change mitigation and adaptation. These opportu -
nities exist in secondary markets and, in some cases, investments in real assets and 
infrastructure projects, such as wind and solar farms and smart grids.
Because the levelized cost of energy for renewable energy generation technologies 
has considerably decreased since 2010, these have become cost competitive with 
some conventional generation technologies, such as coal-based power generation, as 
shown in Exhibit 11 .
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 474
Exhibit 11: 2019 Levelized Cost of Energy, Unsubsidized
1517532281501186644
242154425419919215268
02 55 07 5 100 1251 50 175200 225 250 275Solar  PV—Rooft op R besidentialSolar  PV—Rooft op C&ISolar  PV—T hin Film Utility  Scale (1)WindGas P eaking (2)Nuclear  (3)Coal (4 )Gas Combined Cy cle (2)
Note:  Levelized cost of energy is a measure of the average net present cost of electricity generation 
for a power plant over its lifetime.
(1) Unless otherwise indicated herein, the low end represents a single-axis tracking system and 
the high end represents a fixed-tilt system.
(2) The fuel cost assumption for Lazard’s global, unsubsidized analysis for gas-fired generation 
resources is $3.45/MMBTU.
(3) Unless otherwise indicated, the analysis herein does not reflect decommissioning costs, 
ongoing maintenance-related capital expenditures or the potential economic impacts of federal 
loan guarantees or other subsidies.
(4) High end incorporates 90% carbon capture and compression. Does not include cost of 
transportation and storage.
Sources:  Data is from Lazard ( www  .lazard  .com/  perspective/  lcoe2019 ).
This cost competitiveness, coupled with the urgency to decarbonize our economies 
to avoid the potentially catastrophic physical impacts of climate change, has created 
secular growth opportunity for such businesses and assets, thereby attracting increas -
ingly large investor attention.
A summary of the business segments where such opportunities may lie follows.
Climate mitigation
This category includes companies that are positioned to benefit, directly or indirectly, 
from efforts to curb or mitigate the long-term effects of global climate change, to 
address the environmental challenges presented by global climate change, or to improve 
the efficiency of resource consumption.
Exhibit 12: Climate Mitigation Opportunity Examples 
Business Segment Description
Clean energy Companies in this segment are involved in the generation of clean energy from such sources as 
wind, solar, and small hydro. This segment also includes manufacturers of such equipment as wind -
mills and solar panels, as well as related service providers.
Energy efficiency This segment comprises businesses that provide products and services to improve the efficiency of 
energy consumption in a variety of processes. Examples include energy efficient transportation and 
building solution providers and recycling technology.
Batteries and storage This segment includes companies that help improve battery storage capacity and efficiency. These 
improvements are critical, for instance, to sustainable growth and wider penetration of some of the 
previously mentioned technologies, such as clean energy generation and distribution and electric 
vehicles.
Environmental and Social Risks Faced by Institutional Investors 475
Business Segment Description
Smart grids Smart grids are digitally enhanced versions of the conventional electricity grid, with a layer of com -
munication network overlaying the traditional grid. They are a key enabler for energy security and 
reliability and integration of clean energy resources.
Materials Such materials as copper and battery-grade lithium are key ingredients in the clean energy value 
chain because they are required in clean energy power generation, storage solutions, and electric 
vehicles, resulting in a projected demand rise as the world transitions toward a low-carbon future.
Climate adaptation
This category includes companies that would help better adjust to actual or expected 
future change in climate with an aim to reduce vulnerability to the harmful effects of 
climate change, such as food insecurity, sea-level rise, and frequent extreme weather 
events.
Exhibit 13: Climate Adaptation Opportunity Examples
Business Segment Description
Sustainable agriculture Companies in this segment are involved in providing products 
that improve agriculture productivity and reduce the resource 
consumption in the entire process. Sustainable fish farming 
and timber production are other activities included here.
Water This This segment consists of businesses that provide products 
and services to improve the efficiency of water consumption 
in a variety of processes, including wastewater treatment and 
reuse.
Many institutional investors are increasing allocations to such sectors as part of their 
real-asset allocation or as a potential equity alpha opportunity with the expectation 
that companies in these sectors will outperform the broad equity market over a 
long period of time as the world transitions to a low carbon future. Evaluating and 
sufficiently managing both physical and transition climate risks in the portfolio and 
capturing some of the aforementioned secular growth opportunities could position 
large institutional investor portfolios to outperform and grow in value in the long term.
Material Social Issues for an Institutional Investor
Environmental issues, such as climate change and air pollution, are reasonably mature 
and quite well understood, making them easier to accommodate in discounted cash 
flow models. Social issues, such as community relation, occupational health and 
safety, privacy and data security, modern slavery and other human right violations 
in the supply chain, and inequality, however, are relatively challenging to quantify 
and integrate into financial models. Most social issues have largely qualitative data 
reported by companies, such as health and safety policies and initiatives, lists of 
product quality certifications, and human capital management policies, rather than 
metrics on which long-term performance can be judged. Nevertheless, these issues 
have the potential to cause reputational and financial damage to a company and its 
investors if not managed sufficiently well.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 476
Managing community relations and the social license to operate
For large institutional investors, such as sovereign wealth funds and public pension 
funds, their investments may have positive social impacts, such as improving essential 
public infrastructure and services or providing better access to medicine and tech -
nology, or negative social impacts, via poor labor standards or forceful relocation and 
improper rehabilitation of communities by their portfolio companies. Good corporate 
behavior is usually well received by the community relations, leading to a sustain -
able and mutually beneficial long-term relationship. In many ways, these aspects are 
essential to keeping a company’s social license to operate.
Let’s take a hypothetical example of a sovereign wealth fund (SWF) that has invested 
in a dam-based hydroelectric power plant in an economically less developed part of its 
country. Although there will be a positive environmental impact of the project because 
it will generate electricity from a renewable source, the social impacts of the project 
could be mixed. On the positive side, rural electrification arising from this project 
will lead to economic development in the region, thereby improving the standard of 
living. Dam-based hydroelectric power plants require large-scale land acquisition, 
often leading to relocation and rehabilitation of indigenous communities. Some locals 
protest that they have not been sufficiently consulted by the government before issuing 
consent to establish this project. Moreover, there are allegations of acquisition of land 
for the project at unfair/poor valuations. In some instances, protesting locals were 
forcefully removed and relocated by local government authorities, leading to unrest. 
Eventually, the SWF decides to cease the project implementation owing to this wide 
variety of instances of pushback from the society.
This example highlights the importance of considering social risks when investing. 
Despite having the positive intent of supporting development of renewable power 
generation in a less economically developed part of the country, the SWF faced push -
back and reputational damage for not holistically considering the interests of all the 
stakeholders involved, especially local communities that were the most affected by 
the project. Some of the best practices in community relation management include 
extensive stakeholder consultation meetings to better understand their needs and 
address their concerns, providing alternative employment opportunities to those 
affected, and ensuring fair land acquisition, rehabilitation, and resettlement practices.
Labor issues in the supply chain
Another increasingly important social topic is the one related to poor labor practices, 
especially in the supply chain. Driven by globalization, a consumption boom across 
developed and emerging markets, and the availability of cheap labor in certain parts 
of the world, a large portion of the manufacturing and assembling activities across 
such key sectors as technology and garments has been outsourced to developing and 
frontier markets, such as India, Vietnam, and Malaysia. Although access to cheap, 
semi-skilled labor has led to better bottom lines for multinational companies, it has 
also come at the cost of exploitation of workers in such supply chains. Labor rights 
are being compromised in the form of heavy reliance on temporary workers, excessive 
or forced overtime, and low wages. Moreover, lax regulations in many countries allow 
legal prevention of unionization or any form of collective bargaining, thereby making 
such workers more vulnerable.
Large brands in the apparel industry, such as Nike and Gap, and in the technology 
space, such as Apple and Samsung, have all been accused of various levels of lapses 
in their supply chain related to the aforementioned labor management issues. Apart 
from suffering significant damage to their brands and reputations, which could lead 
to consumer boycotts, such companies may also face additional costs and/or fines 
related to product recalls and ad hoc shifting of supply chains.
Case Study 477
For SWFs with equity exposure to some of the largest apparel brands and branded 
tech hardware companies, considering such issues while making investments is of 
paramount importance because lack of transparency in the supply chain and lapses 
in labor management may weigh heavily on the resilience of such supply chains amid 
global-scale disruptions, such as that caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition 
to the financial risks, reputational risks may also arise because of a view that the SWF 
implicitly supports such improper and unethical business practices.
The “just” transition
Sustainable development involves meeting the needs of the present generation without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Sustainable 
development includes economic, social, and environmental dimensions, all of which 
are interrelated. In the transition to environmentally sustainable economies and 
societies, several challenges may arise—for example, displacement of workers and job 
losses in certain industries, such as coal mining, fossil fuel extraction/production, and 
fossil fuel-based power generation. Similarly, increased energy costs due to carbon 
taxes and higher costs of commodities partly resulting from sustainable production 
practices may have adverse effects on the incomes of poor households. Therefore, a 
“just” transition is necessary to ensure that there are limited negative social impacts 
in our pursuit of positive environmental impacts via avoiding fossil fuels and imple -
menting sustainable agriculture and business practices. Although there is no fixed set 
of guidelines, the just transition encourages a dialogue between workers, industry, 
and governments influenced by geographical, political, cultural, and social contexts 
in order to tackle some of the aforementioned challenges.
CASE STUDY
analyze and evaluate the financial and non-financial risk exposures in 
the portfolio strategy of an institutional investor
discuss various methods to manage the risks that arise on long-term 
direct investments of an institutional investor
evaluate strengths and weaknesses of an enterprise risk management 
system and recommend improvements
Case Study: Introduction
You are working as a Risk Analyst at a small sovereign wealth fund (SWF) and reporting 
to the Head of Risk. The SWF is considering making some new investments in direct 
private equity and direct infrastructure. You have been asked to review risk aspects of 
these investment opportunities, which will be discussed in an upcoming investment 
committee meeting. Assuming the investments will be made, you will also have the 
responsibility to monitor the risk of the investments as well as make recommended 
improvements to the SWF’s risk management system. You are excited about these 
opportunities and look forward to putting your knowledge and skills learned from 
the CFA Program to work!4
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 478
Case Study: Background
 ■Over 20 years ago, the “Republic of Ruritania” discovered an extremely large 
deposit of crucial rare earth metals that are key elements in the manufactur -
ing of high-speed computers used in science and finance. The entire deposit 
was sold to various entities allowing Ruritania to secure its financial future. 
At the same time, the government of Ruritania “dollarized” the economy, 
moving from the domestic RRR currency to the USD.
 ■The government of Ruritania (R) decided to form a sovereign wealth fund, 
R-SWF, in order to grow the capital for future generations. This type of SWF 
is a “savings fund, ” intended to share wealth across generations by trans -
forming non-renewable assets into diversified financial assets.
 ■R-SWF has built up a diversified portfolio of equities, fixed income, and 
alternative investments.
 ■In equities and fixed income, the SWF invests in developed markets, emerg -
ing markets, and frontier markets through both fund investing and direct 
investing.
 ■In alternatives, the SWF invests in private equity (PE), infrastructure, and 
real estate. Investment methods used include direct investing, making 
co-investments, and fund investing.
 ■The case study begins in Section 3 at an investment committee meeting 
to discuss two potential investments. The next scene, in Section 4, is set 
three years later, when the performance of the investments are discussed 
at another investment committee meeting. The final scene, in Section 5, 
is set five years later and provides additional information on investment 
performance.
R-SWF’S Investments: 1.0
Initial Case Facts (1.0)
Today, the investment committee of R-SWF is considering several new investments, 
including direct private equity and direct infrastructure investments. The investment 
committee will be discussing risk aspects of the investments, led by the Head of Risk 
and supported by you, a Risk Analyst.
 ■The investment committee meeting will open with an overview of asset 
allocation and a few basic discussions on the two proposed investments. 
However, the focus of the meeting is on the potential risks of the new 
investment proposals, not details on the investments themselves. (An 
in-depth investment committee meeting on the new investments was held 
last month.)
 ■The meeting will then move on to a discussion of the potential risks of the 
two specific direct investments being considered.
1. Direct infrastructure investment in an airport
2. Direct PE investment in a beverage manufacturer
 ■The investment committee meeting will discuss key risks that R-SWF should 
consider as it decides whether to make new direct investments in PE and 
infrastructure.
Case Study 479
 ■All investment committee participants (and CFA Program Level III 
candidates) are provided with a background memo with the following 
information:
Memo A: Background on R-SWF’s asset allocation and performance
Memo B: Details on the proposed direct infrastructure investment
Memo C: Details on the proposed direct private equity investment
INVESTMENT COMMITTEE MEETING MEMO 1.0
To: R-SWF Investment Committee Members
From: R-SWF Chief Investment Officer
Re: Investment Committee Meeting Agenda
Distribution: Head of Risk, Head of PE, Head of Infrastructure, Head of 
Equities, and Level III Candidates in the CFA Program
An agenda for today’s meeting is as follows:
Agenda
 ■Opening Remarks and Review of Asset Allocation: Chief Investment 
Officer
 ■Review of Infrastructure Investment Opportunity: Head of 
Infrastructure
 ■Review of Private Equity Investment Opportunity: Head of PE
 ■Discussion of Risk—Infrastructure Investment: Head of Risk + 
Everyone
 ■Discussion of Risk—PE Investment: Head of Risk + Everyone
 ■Closing Remarks: Chief Investment Officer
The investment committee meeting will discuss key risks that R-SWF should 
consider as it determines whether to make new direct investments in PE and 
infrastructure.
Memo 1A: Asset Allocation and Performance
 ■Since its inception, over a 25+ year period, R-SWF has built a diversi -
fied portfolio of investments. As of last month, the fund had AUM of 
$50 billion USD, with the fund outperforming its overall benchmark 
by 150 bps net of fees since inception. Of course, there have been 
short-term periods of underperformance as the fund pursued its long-
term strategy.
 ■Asset allocation as of last month for the overall fund was as follows:
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 480
Alternatives
50%
Cash
1%Equities
40%
Fixed Income
9%—Total Port folio
 ■Asset allocation of portfolio in percentages. Division of total portfolio 
with alternatives gaining major share of 50% followed by Equities, 40%, 
Fixed income, 9%, and Cash, 1%. 
Asset allocation of portfolio in percentages. Division of total portfolio 
with alternatives gaining major share of 50% followed by Equities, 40%, 
Fixed income, 9%, and Cash, 1%. 
 ■As of last month, R-SWF had approximately 50% of assets invested in 
alternative investments, consistent with its long-term objectives.
 ■In today’s investment committee meeting, R-SWF is considering two 
new investments in alternative investments—specifically, in direct 
private equity and direct infrastructure investments. (Note: Funding for 
these two investments will come from a combination of cash, dividends , 
receivable s, and fixed income. The mix will be determined by the Asset /
Liability Committee, or ALCO).
 ■Because today’s investment committee meeting will focus on alter -
native investments, we will break the allocation of alternatives down 
further, as follows:
Real Estate
15%
Infrastructur e
10%
Natural R esources
5%Hedge F unds
10%Private Capital
10%Alternative In vestment s
Case Study 481
 ■Division of alternative investments with real estate gaining major share 
of 15% followed by private capital, infrastructure and hedge funds, 
each at 10%, and natural resources at 5%. 
Division of alternative investments with real estate gaining major share 
of 15% followed by private capital, infrastructure and hedge funds, 
each at 10%, and natural resources at 5%. 
 ■As of last month, R-SWF had approximately 10% of assets invested in 
private capital and 10% of assets invested in Infrastructure.
 ■Next, we provide a breakdown of private capital and infrastructure:
Infrastructure
PD direct &
Co-In vestments
1%Infrastructure F unds
7%
Infrastructure Direct
3%Private Capital
Private Equity  (PE) funds
5%
PE direct &
Co-In vestment s
3%
Private Debt
 (PD) funds
1%
 ■Private capital vs infrastructure. Private capital divided into 5% PE 
funds, 3% PE direct and co-investments, 1% each in PD direct and 
co-investments and PD funds. Infrastructure divided into infrastruc -
ture funds, 7% and infrastructure direct, 3%. 
Division of Private capital and infrastructure. Private capital divided 
into 5% PE funds, 3% PE direct and co-investments, 1% each in PD 
direct and co-investments and PD funds. Infrastructure divided into 
infrastructure funds, 7% and infrastructure direct, 3%. 
 ■As of last month, R-SWF had approximately 3% of assets invested in 
private equity direct and co-investment and 3% of assets invested in 
direct Infrastructure.
 ■The investment committee will be discussing risk aspects of the cases, 
led by the Head of Risk and supported by the Risk Analyst.
 ■Details on the proposed infrastructure investment are found in Memo 
1B.
 ■Details on the proposed private equity investment are found in Memo 
1C.
Memo 1B: Proposed Direct Infrastructure Investment
 ■The infrastructure direct investment opportunity is an investment in 
helping modernize an airport in the frontier market island nation of 
“Sunnyland. ”
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 482
 ■Sunnyland has beautiful beaches and several hotels, ranging from 
3–star to 5–star. However, the Sunnyland Airport has only one small 
runway that can support airplanes of only up to 10 passengers.
 ■The Sunnyland government is keen on expanding the airport with a 
new terminal and new runway. Doing so will allow much larger air -
craft to land (up to 150 passengers) and be a major boost to tourism.
 ■The airport is located about 2 km from the sea, providing scenic views 
on takeoff and landing. The new runway will be built 1 km from the 
sea, providing even nicer views.
 ■R-SWF has been approached by the Sunnyland Airport Authority 
(SAA) to consider a $100 million investment in a public–private part -
nership (PPP) on a build–operate–transfer (BOT) basis.
 ■For R-SWF (with assets of $50 billion), this is a small investment (0.2% 
of total assets). The investment will be about 2% of total infrastructure 
assets—$100 million/($100 million + $5,000 million)—which includes 
investments in funds and direct investments.
 ■Other facts about this infrastructure investment that are important for 
the investment committee to understand: (Note: The focus of the case 
and investment committee discussion is risks.)
 ●Total project cost of $500 million for new 5 million passenger per 
annum (pax) terminal
 ●$33 million investment to be provided by Airport Operating Group 
(AOG), which will operate the airport under a management agree -
ment (with fixed fee plus/minus performance incentive)
 ●$300 million funding to be provided through non-recourse project 
finance debt (i.e., approx. 70/30 debt/equity) with 15–year tenor 
following 3-year grace period
 ●2–year construction period, with fixed price construction contract 
awarded under tender
 ●25–year concession (including 2–year construction period), with 
investor consortium entitled to collect all regulated airport charges 
(e.g., passenger departure charge, landing charges) and commercial 
revenue (duty free, retail, F&B, car parking), subject to payment of 
quarterly concession fee of 35% of all revenue to SAA
 ●Airport charges (70% of all revenue) are regulated by concession 
contract—that is, schedule of charges set and then subject to stated 
formula for future changes (e.g., CPI)
 ●Concession agreement includes quality and performance standards 
to be met for design/construction/development (including timely 
delivery of new terminal) and operations, respectively
 ●Expected IRR for full investment term of 25 years of 15%
Risk Discussion: Infrastructure Investment
The Head of Infrastructure believes the potential return on this project far 
outweighs the potential risk(s). However, she is happy to discuss potential risks 
with the investment committee.
Case Study 483
Memo 1C: Proposed Direct Private Equity Investment
 ■The private equity direct investment opportunity is an investment in 
a local beverage company (Atsui Beverage Company Limited (ABC)) 
that manufactures and sells carbonated beverages. The investment will 
be used to modernize the plant.
 ■ABC is an unlisted beverage company located in the tropical, land-
locked nation of “ Atsui. ” Atsui has a developing economy and can be 
considered a frontier market.
 ■ABC is the only local manufacturer of carbonated beverages in Atsui. 
All other beverages are imported.
 ■ABC’s factory is located near a river that allows for transport to the 
port. Also, the river is known for its unique biodiversity.
 ■R-SWF’s Head of Private Equity has been on several vacations to Atsui 
and saw an investment opportunity.
 ■ABC is keen on modernizing its plant, but the founder is worried 
about giving up control. Thus, the founder is willing to sell only a 
minority stake of 35% in exchange for $25 million.
 ■For R-SWF (with assets of $50 billion), this is a small investment 
(0.05% of total assets). The investment will be about 0.4% of total PE 
assets—$25 million/($25 million + $6,000 million)—which includes 
investments in funds, co-investments, and direct investments.
 ■Other facts about this direct PE investment that are important for the 
investment committee to understand: (Note: The focus of the case and 
investment committee discussion is risks.)
 ●R-SWF has been investing in PE for many years in funds. Over the 
years, R-SWF has developed direct investing capabilities through 
its co-investments and is now expanding its direct investing 
program.
 ●Because of the increased direct investing capabilities of R-SWF and 
recent outperformance in returns, R-SWF is looking to increase its 
private equity allocation to direct investments over the next five 
years.
 ●The government of Atsui has implemented tariffs on all soft drink 
imports. There is an upcoming election that could change this 
stance.
 ●The cost to modernize the ABC plant is estimated to be $20 
million.
 ●Over the last 12 months, ABC had a revenue of $50 million. 
Revenue is expected to increase significantly over the next 10 
years—with a modernized plant.
 ●Over the last 12 months, ABC had an EBITDA of $7 million. This 
is an EBITDA margin of 14% and a 10× EBITDA multiple. The 
Head of PE feels that there is significant room for improvement.
 ●With the new technology from the plant modernization, ABC 
will be able to expand into non-carbonated drinks, such as sports 
drinks and juices.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 484
 ●Once the plant is modernized, productivity will improve signifi -
cantly, allowing ABC to reduce factory staff headcount by 40%, 
from 500 employees to 300 employees, which will drive a higher 
EBITDA margin in the future.
 ●With a significant minority, R-SWF will be allowed to have two 
seats on the board of ABC. So, the board will expand from five 
members to seven members. R-SWF is planning to have the Head 
of PE join the board of ABC but hasn’t decided on the other board 
seat.
Risk Discussion: Private Equity Investment
The Head of PE believes the potential return on this project far outweighs 
the potential risk(s). However, he is happy to discuss potential risks with the 
Investment Committee.
IN-TEXT QUESTION:
Please respond to the following question based on Investment Committee 
Memo 1.0 .
As R-SWF’s Risk Analyst, do you anticipate liquidity risk will likely be 
highlighted as a significant financial risk in the upcoming risk discussions 
for either investment? Explain your thinking.
Guideline Answer:
No. I do not anticipate the Head of Infrastructure or the Head of PE 
to highlight liquidity risk as a significant risk for either investment. 
Although liquidity risk is the main risk that long-term institutional inves -
tors face, particularly during a significant market decline, each of these 
investments represents a small portion of R-SWF’s total assets. R-SWF 
does not have cash flow pressure, unlike many institutional investors that 
face pressure from the regular payment of liabilities. In addition, R-SWF 
has been growing over time and is making a concerted effort to expand 
its direct investment program.
Direct investments typically help mitigate some of the liquidity issues commonly 
experienced when investing in a fund because direct investment provides a greater 
amount of control and discretion over when to exit investments. Furthermore, 
as the direct investment program grows and the proportion of direct invest -
ments as part R-SWF’s total assets increases, R-SWF’s ability to manage capital 
should improve. I believe there are other financial risks that are more likely to 
be highlighted as a significant risk for each investment.
Investment Committee Meeting 1.0
Participants
Chief Investment Officer (CIO)
Head of Infrastructure
Case Study 485
Head of PE
Head of Risk
Head of Equities
Analysts [no speaking role]
Chief Investment Officer:
Good morning, everyone. Welcome to today’s investment committee meeting of the 
sovereign wealth fund of the Republic of Ruritania. After running this money on behalf 
of our citizens and future generations since its inception, the fund has outperformed 
our benchmark by 150 basis points, net of fees, and we’ve grown AUM to $50 billion 
over 25 years. We are very blessed.
At last month’s investment committee meeting, our Head of Infrastructure  and 
our Head of PE  got together to discuss the financials and particulars of two invest -
ment opportunities. As they both deserve our attention, today we are joined by our 
Head of Risk , along with our Head of Equities , to review them through the lens of 
risk. Our esteemed junior analysts are in the room with us to observe and provide 
additional analysis as required.
For now, as we consider our opportunities, I’m mostly here as a facilitator, to pave 
the way for a robust discussion of investment risk.
Memo A shows us our asset allocation as of mid-June, and we’ve got 50% in alter -
natives. We believe in alternatives because our liabilities are negligible and we take 
a long-term view of things. About 40% of our allocation is in listed equities, with a 
large portion of that in emerging markets, which we’re also big believers in. If we do 
fund one or both of the two investments on the table, we’ll do it with a mix of cash, 
dividends receivable, and fixed income, but that’s not for this committee to decide; 
the ALCO will go over that at a later date.
In any event, our focus here is private capital, the private equity side. We’ve got 
about 3% of our investments in direct private equity and co-investments and about 
3% in direct infrastructure.
Again, this meeting is primarily about risk. Let’s go to Memo B and ask our Head 
of Infrastructure  to talk us through the first investment. It’s usually the depth of her 
infrastructure experience that gives R-SWF the comfort to proceed in the face of risk.
Infrastructure Investment Discussion
Head of Infrastructure:
Thank you for the kind words, CIO . I’m glad everyone’s here so we can apply the full 
breadth of the investment committee’s expertise.
This is an airport BOT project, a PPP in the frontier island nation of Sunnyland, 
whose primary industry is tourism. The members of our hard-working analyst team 
who are new to infrastructure have been briefed on the build-operate-transfer models 
that private developers often adopt under private-public partnerships so they can 
operate the facilities they have designed and built for a number of years before handing 
them over to government agencies.
[Head of Infrastructure  looks around the room to see a few polite nods from 
the assembled analysts.]
Funds are needed for an airport upgrade: A new terminal and a new, bigger runway 
will accommodate larger planes. Sunnyland needs to get rid of the passenger bottleneck 
to allow for an all-important boost in tourism. We’re thinking $500 million and two 
years of construction time should be enough.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 486
Ruritania is prepared to contribute $100 million, and we’re insisting on bringing 
in AOG, a properly experienced airport operator, which will also be investing private 
equity—about $33 million. The rest of the capital will be no-recourse debt, about 
$300 million, and an equity injection from the government and other infrastructure 
investors for the remainder. The debt will be 15-year with a 3-year grace period.
With the BOT arrangements, of course, we take over the airport from the begin -
ning under a 25-year concession agreement for all the cash flows from the terminal. 
So that’s airport charges, like aircraft landing and passenger departure fees, as well 
as the commercial revenue from duty-free concessions, retail, and so forth, and we 
remit 35% of what we collect to the Sunnyland Airport Authority on a quarterly basis. 
If we want to charge more, any increases—say, for CPI adjustments—are worked out 
according to fixed formulas.
CIO  has set the stage for this discussion of risk, and in that spirit, everyone should 
note the standards and conditions of our agreement with the government. You already 
know we’ve got a two-year development program—that’s two years to see the revamped 
airport up and running—so if there are delays or shortfalls in quality, the concession 
agreement sets out the consequences.
Finally, our expected return for the full 25-year term given our fund’s $100 million 
investment is a 15% IRR.
Chief Investment Officer:
Thank you, Head of Infrastructure . That’s a sufficient return, to be sure, but let’s 
also understand that our involvement can help our friends down in Sunnyland. If 
we execute this project carefully, it means a boost to the wealth of all Sunnylanders.
You’ve been there recently, right?
Head of Infrastructure:
I have. All indications are that it’s an attractive tourist destination. Tourism is key 
to them now; they lack natural and other resources to diversify the economy. That’s 
what they’re depending on to build the economy.
Things are constrained because of the airport. The runway allows only for short, 
smaller aircraft, so just by increasing runway size and the associated facilities, you’re 
paving a path for the whole nation to grow.
Chief Investment Officer:
I ask the assembled team to consider for a minute the responsibilities we have to 
ourselves, to Ruritania; we all feel partly responsible for its success. When we invest 
in another sovereign country, such as Sunnyland, we may carry over a similar sense of 
responsibility, and we take that seriously. While our proposed $100 million investment 
is just 0.2% of our AUM, this single investment in transportation infrastructure will 
have an outsized impact on our investees.
With that in mind, let’s move to the other proposal on the table. Our Head of PE  
has recently returned from Atsui, the site of the proposed private equity investment 
outlined in Memo C. Over to you, Head of PE .
Private Equity Investment Discussion
Head of PE:
Yeah, I just got back. The company is called Atsui Beverage Company or ABC for 
short, and it was kind of “love at first sight”—or sip. I was on the beach, and a waiter 
brought me a drink and said it was called the “Mango Special. ” I thanked him but I 
was barely listening. You know how it is; my mind was elsewhere. But after the third 
sip, I was paying less attention to my leisure and more attention to just how good 
Case Study 487
this drink was: refreshing, perfectly sweet, and unlike anything I’d tasted before. You 
know I’m always thinking about investments, ladies and gents, and I began to think 
I’d stumbled onto a winner.
I’ve been back to Atsui three times, and I introduced R-SWF to the team at the 
ABC plant that makes the Mango Special. I explained how sovereign wealth funds 
usually partner for the long term, and I built some trust while learning about their 
business. I know how small this is compared to the rest of our portfolio, but I’m still 
obsessed with this drink, so I figured out that we can invest $25 million for 35% of 
the business. They’ve got $50 million in revenue and $7 million in EBITDA. For those 
on the team who can’t do math quickly like I can, that’s a 14% EBITDA margin. And 
we’re looking at a company valuation of roughly 10× EBITDA.
So, wait: Is this a good deal or not?
Well, let’s think about it. ABC markets the only locally sourced carbonated beverage 
in Atsui, and tariffs are imposed on foreign competitors. That alone seems pretty great. 
And they’d use $20 million of our $25 million to modernize the plant. That way, they 
can turn out product way faster while also gearing up to make non-carbonated drinks 
like sports drinks and juices. We’d drive efficiency enough to cut headcount from 500 
to 300, and that’s even better for the EBITDA margin: new equipment, big changes.
I’ve got the most knowledge on the ground, so I could take a board seat along 
with someone else from our team. We’ve gotten pretty comfortable with co-investing, 
making some money, and developing our skills, and since we’re expanding our direct 
investing effort anyway, this seems like a good fit. It’s just $25  million out of our 
$50 billion pool, so it’s a good way to learn, even if some of us think it’s risky.
And, you know, sun, mango drinks, and the beach—I bet everyone wants to join 
the board!
Chief Investment Officer:
So, the plant modernization allows for both a meaningful expansion of the product 
line and significant cost savings. But you said that a cut of 200 people underpins 
those savings?
Head of PE:
Yeah.
Chief Investment Officer:
OK. Any further questions for Head of PE ?
Head of Risk:
A question from me for Head of PE . You mentioned that these guys are the sole bev -
erage manufacturer in Atsui and that there are entry barriers on foreign manufacturers 
coming in. You’ve been on the ground, so are local competitors raising their voices 
about giving ABC some competition?
Head of PE:
I’ve done a lot of local research, and I’m not seeing anyone. When ABC thinks about 
threats, they think of the big international drink players, who are still scared off by 
the government’s import tariffs.
Chief Investment Officer:
A lot of senior officials are keen to grow the local industry. It’s a small country, and 
there’s a common emotional investment in ABC’s success.
Head of Risk:
These do seem like heavy tariffs. CIO  mentioned they’re as high as 100% if you try 
to buy Coke or Pepsi. The memo says there’s an election coming up. Surely there’s a 
risk those entry barriers fall away?
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 488
Head of PE:
A mango drink is much better than cola, I promise!
Chief Investment Officer:
I’ve done a little outreach myself to people in the know. Combining that with Head 
of PE ’s research, I’d say a relaxing of tariffs after the election is a fair assumption.
Head of Equities:
I have a question. Will this investment allow for ABC to start exports? Is that part of 
the expansion plan?
Head of PE:
The markets nearby are also tropical, frontier nations. Business relations are decent, 
and the plant is next to a river that connects to a big port.
Chief Investment Officer:
Head of PE  has explained that the plant workers fish on the freshwater river during 
their lunch and during breaks, and the river does indeed connect to Atsui’s major 
port. I see good potential for connecting to neighbouring buyers.
Head of Risk:
But let’s remember that this is a frontier market with a developing economy.
Chief Investment Officer:
Quite right. Beverages are still somewhat of a luxury item. Nevertheless, there’s plenty 
of growth potential for us and for them.
Head of Equities:
Sure, that’s encouraging on exports, but Head of PE  said that ABC sees its competi -
tion as the big international drink players, who are still scared off by the government’s 
tariffs. If the election brings in a government keen on foreign investment, that could 
completely overturn the advantage this particular business has.
Let’s apply a probability to a tariff reduction and to import markets opening up. 
Pepsi and Coca-Cola have much deeper pockets for waiting out a price war.
Head of PE:
I hear you, but maybe I went too far by saying ABC sees them as competitors. Products 
like the Mango Special and their other drinks don’t actually exist in the Coke and 
Pepsi product lines, and the Mango Special recipe is so proprietary that if we protect 
it, it’s a real competitive advantage. The other ABC beverages use tropical fruit the 
multinationals don’t have supply chains for, and we believe—I mean, ABC  believes 
they have a way of mixing things that no one else can figure out. If that’s the case, a 
path to exports is still there.
With investment, they still have time to get into other juices and diversify. And 
we’re always talking to government officials and to people who could make up the 
government, and everyone’s pretty aligned.
Chief Investment Officer:
These risks are tied to the modernization program we’re investing in, which means 
job cuts. In frontier markets, this is very sensitive: Unions may protest, and politicians 
may make it part of their election agenda, especially given that we’re talking about one 
of the country’s more popular companies. We’re veering into reputational risk here.
Look, this is a rather small investment, of $25 million, but even a small investment 
can have an outsized negative impact on us if we don’t manage the risk properly.
Thoughts?
Case Study 489
Head of PE:
We’re not just investing and then forgetting things, folks. We’re going to be proactive. 
Before modernization starts, we’re going to do some research that shows us what issues 
are in the minds of all the people of Atsui, not just our workers, and we’re going to 
design new community programs around that. We’ll try to make a positive impact first.
We know that cutting employees is sensitive. But by helping many more people 
than we let go and by giving employees proper training so they have the skills for 
whatever they’re doing next, we’re going to be part of a sensible transition.
Head of Equities:
That’s going to be critical. Community relations is a key component of our social 
license to operate.
Chief Investment Officer:
My dialogue with the Head of PE  on the ground in Atsui has been ongoing, and he 
wants us to do right by the community. It’s almost an impact investment in and of itself.
Any other questions on the PE investment?
Head of Risk:
How comfortable are you with ABC’s management? We’ll only have a minority stake, 
and founders are sometimes not the best people to run a business.
So are these people reliable? Do they have the right skill set? The right education? 
Any worry about potential corruption?
Head of PE:
Our due diligence is thorough, and we don’t think corruption is an issue. We’re new 
to direct investing, and so we’ll be tracking progress extra carefully. And also we’re 
the ones implementing a lot of the modernization, so there’ll be more monitoring 
built in than ever before.
Do we keep management or not? You always have this question in private equity. 
With all the co-investing we’ve done, the directors of the funds we partner with find 
management teams and then keep them and then work with  them to help them grow.
I see your point that we’d only hold 35% of ABC, but we’ll also hold two board 
seats. I can’t predict the future, but we’ve done a lot of due diligence and we’ve done 
a lot of interviews with management, customers, and suppliers. We’ve interviewed a 
lot of people who know the management.
We’re paying $25 million, and $20 million goes to modernizing the plant. 
Management will take a little money off the table, and we’ll structure it so that they 
are incentivized in alignment with growth and good oversight. After all, they’ll still 
hold 65%.
We think they’ll see that working with us will create success and that willful 
mismanagement or corruption or taking too much money out of the business works 
against them in the long run. We’re coming to them with our track record through 
the co-investments we’ve made, our expertise, and our channels to other markets.
There’s always risk, but that’s my point of view.
Head of Equities:
I support the PE investment. With management having this much skin in the game, 
their interests are aligned with ours.
Chief Investment Officer:
This is a $25 million investment out of our $50 billion fund, and there are impact 
elements as well that make it more interesting.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 490
Head of PE:
Yeah, and to build our direct investment program, we must learn by doing. We’ve 
gotten really comfortable with co-investing, and that’s great, but to me, it’s the people 
who do this a lot on their own who tend to be really successful.
Yes, there’s some risk with management and the government, but a lot of those 
are risks we’re willing to take with one of our first direct investments, where we can 
get our hands dirty. It’s a simple business, right? It’s carbonated beverages, and then 
maybe we go into juices and non-carbonated stuff, right? We can really build the 
experience of working with management and the other skills that our direct program 
is going to need.
Hey, maybe our next committee meeting should be in Atsui!
General Discussion on Risk
Chief Investment Officer:
I won’t argue, but let me ask the committee about a risk that applies to both of these 
investments. We’re an open forum, and so I ask the entire room: What bears more 
scrutiny?
Head of Risk:
The first thing that comes to my mind when we’re investing in frontier markets like 
these is, “How do we deal with the currency risk?” It’s hard to hedge these currencies. 
Meanwhile, they can move wildly against the dollar, turning a really good investment 
into a really bad investment.
What’s your read on this, Head of PE ?
Head of PE:
I’m not stressed about it. When it comes to me and most other visitors to Atsui, we’re 
using US dollars.
Head of Infrastructure:
I can speak to the currency risk in Sunnyland. When we’re talking about the aviation 
industry and airports, a lot of revenues for infrastructure investors come in the form 
of regulated charges. Look at our own concession contract: 70% of the revenues are 
airport charges. It’s typical with these arrangements to outsource the collection of 
these charges to international organizations like IATA. They collect the revenue from 
the airline, and almost all of that is paid in dollars, so we’re comfortable there.
That leaves the 30% of our revenue coming from commercial sources—retail rev -
enue in the terminal and past the gate and all that duty free and parking. In the big 
international airports, those transactions take place in the local currency, but we’re 
in a locale that’s expressly seeking international tourism. Pricing will be geared to 
international markets, so we’ll have the freedom to price everything in dollars and 
benchmark the pricing against the affluent traveler.
Head of Risk:
I’m glad to hear that.
What about the borrowing side, though? To keep people happy and the logistics 
simple, I assume any borrowings will come from local banks that use their country’s 
currency.
Head of Infrastructure:
It’s a good thought, but no. The lenders are big international banks. The in-country 
banks may participate, but given the size of the loans and how long term these arrange -
ments are—at least in Sunnyland—the local banks just don’t have the capacity yet.
Case Study 491
Whoever the lenders are, they’ll be comfortable knowing the investors are getting 
their returns mostly in US dollars, which is what the $300 million of debt is denom -
inated in.
Head of Risk:
Which brings me to defaults.
Head of Infrastructure:
Right, well, this is non-recourse financing, and the concession agreement outlines 
the terms of default and termination. These are matters that impinge on the direct 
arrangement between the government and the banks, so while it’s something to be 
aware of, I don’t see us getting dragged in.
Head of Risk:
Thanks.
Head of Equities:
I know the Head of Risk  was coming to this, but the topic is coming up very often 
recently.
If you look at the World Economic Forum’s “Global Risk Report” since 2017, cli -
mate risk and extreme weather feature in the top risks every time. Year over year, the 
weather gets more erratic. Sea-level rise may be gradual, but it doesn’t stop. And while 
I understand the need to support Sunnyland’s economy by expanding the airport, the 
memo says that the new runway is less than a kilometer from the sea.
Sure, you get a fantastic view when you take off and land, but the sea is rising, and 
the risk of flooding could become real even just during high tide. Running an airport 
in those conditions would not be possible.
It’s a 25-year infrastructure investment. That’s long enough for climate risks to 
materialize and impact operations. We’ve got to factor this in.
Head of Infrastructure
These points are well taken, but keep in mind that to even get as far as finding inter -
ested lenders for the airport, it means we’ve gone through the due diligence process. 
The big banks need environmental-impact statements before they jump on board, and 
even just in our role as equity investors, we had to satisfy ourselves that these kinds 
of issues were thought through.
Head of Risk:
Sure, and naming risks is necessary and commendable, but—
Head of Infrastructure:
—But that doesn’t mean the risk goes away. Of course.
I’m obviously not an engineer or a contractor, but what I’d say to the committee 
is that the experts tells us, in the time frame we’re looking at, environmental risks are 
unlikely to materialize, and even so, they’re accounted for during the design process. 
The drainage systems are modified to handle increases in groundwater levels, and the 
engineers are building in once-in-50-years and once-in-100-years flood scenarios. 
Those are risks they’re confident they can build for.
Chief Investment Officer:
None of us are experts here, but my perspective is that we can take comfort from the 
fact that these kinds of challenges have been around for decades. Consider Kansai 
International Airport in Japan: People are always saying that it’s sinking—and it has 
gone down a tiny bit—but it’s been around for over 25 years and it’s been fine.
It’s important to be aware of it, and I’m glad you brought it up, but indications are 
that there’s nothing really stopping us on this front.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 492
Head of Infrastructure:
That’s right. We’ve come to rely on the reports from the technical adviser, and that’s 
a fairly standard approach for us with these sorts of investments.
Head of PE:
Agreed.
Head of Risk:
What about previous foreign investment in Sunnyland? Did political risk come into 
play for other investments? What’s the general feeling?
Head of PE:
Head of Infrastructure  called me from Sunnyland when I was on the beach in Atsui 
planning the ABC upgrades, and he asked me to look into it. Investment in Sunnyland 
has mostly been on the tourism side. There’s a mixture of three- and five-star hotels, 
so major international hotel operators are around. And they’re still arriving, but they 
feel the transportation bottleneck. Those who are there and the ones who are thinking 
about coming in are happy about the airport project.
Head of Infrastructure:
And I haven’t heard any horror stories about investors in Sunnyland getting burned 
because of unfair rule changes. Plus, relations are good. The Sunnyland authorities 
approached us as a fellow government institution, so we’re comfortable on a sort of 
government-to-government basis.
Chief Investment Officer:
One nice thing about an island nation is that it is an island. There’s less political inter -
ference from the neighbours. From what Head of Infrastructure  was telling me, we 
can feel positive that our investment in the airport will help the economy and stabilize 
the local political situation more than the contrary.
Head of Risk:
Good to hear. Let’s dig a little deeper on the modeling we’ve done for the airport 
investment. We expect a 15% IRR over 25 years. That is our base case. Have we done 
any stress tests to those baseline expectations? What if there are delays and we have 
to pay a penalty? What if construction costs overrun the budget? What if revenues fall 
short? Give us an idea of how bad the IRR could get if we don’t achieve the base case.
Head of Infrastructure:
Sure. I like how you’ve framed the question, because it covers some key risks.
From our perspective, the biggest risk is traffic—comparing the actual number of 
visitors and tourists coming in and out of the airport against our projections. We’re 
not experts here, either, but we hired an established traffic consultant who looks 
at the global tourism numbers and the particulars of our development to make a 
determination.
The consultant produced a low case and a high case based on different traffic fore -
casts. The low case is also of interest to the banks, of course, which want confidence 
that they’ll be paid.
Our analysis of the reasonable low case puts IRR down to around 10% or 11%. The 
high case pushes the return out into the high teens.
There are some sensitivities around CapEx, and we’re looking to manage this risk 
through a fixed-price contract, the language of which says that whatever penalties 
we’d face for delayed or subpar construction will be passed down to the contractor. 
We’ve applied a ±10% sensitivity around that, and it does impinge on the IRR a little 
bit but not as much as the low-traffic case. If we run into real cost overruns or delays, 
we’re looking at about a 13% IRR.
Case Study 493
Head of PE:
The airport’s key source of revenue is tourist numbers, and we’ve got an exotic luxury 
destination on our hands, folks.
Head of Equities:
Agreed. And therefore, we need to consider the risk of a prolonged global recession 
when discretionary vacations and spending take a nosedive. For a small island like 
Sunnyland, this is a big risk. Some scenario analysis that considers the impact of a 
downturn that lasts for two or three or even four years seems necessary.
Head of Infrastructure:
We’ve done some work on those scenarios, and it’s influenced by a specific responsi -
bility of the government, which they have explicitly accepted, to aggressively promote 
tourism as soon as, if not before, a recession hits.
Think of the aviation industry, which has been through shocks again and again. 
With downtimes like the global financial crisis around 2009 and the few instances 
where travelers were spooked by crashes, the airlines came out with attractive deals 
and recovery was quick.
Sunnyland’s government is used to adjusting and always reduces pricing to attract 
tourists when they need to. Our sense is that even a prolonged recession isn’t a deal 
killer, because the authorities and the industry will react quickly.
Head of PE:
I like your optimism.
Chief Investment Officer
Well, beyond optimism, we’re starting from a low base; there’s enormous room for 
growth in Sunnyland.
Head of Risk:
If I may, CIO , just a follow-up question to the Head of Equities ’ point on the recession: 
We all experienced the coronavirus pandemic in 2020, and plenty of scientists have 
warned us that pandemics are going to be more likely—
Head of Equities:
—Helped along by climate change!
Head of Risk:
Yes, thank you, because of how we’re damaging the environment, and again, this 
investment has a 25-year horizon. What if another pandemic causes rampant restric -
tions and people are simply not allowed to travel? Has that been factored into our 
scenario analysis?
Head of Infrastructure:
To a limited extent, yes. We pass through 35% of whatever revenue we take on, so 
our payments to the government are handled that way in the concession agreement. 
That leaves the crucial aspect of defaults to lenders and what would trigger them.
The built-in debt-service reserve covers us for a period of time, and if travel is on 
hold for too much longer, then we turn to restructuring or rescheduling the financing.
But let’s understand that the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 was a game-changer, 
and the language and dynamics of certain contractual agreements were adjusted to 
avoid straight defaults in these cases. And the concern here is about short-term impact, 
whereas over 25 years, we expect things to gradually recover, so our concerns are 
more about keeping the project going and avoiding default during the problem period.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 494
Voting on Infrastructure Investment
Chief Investment Officer:
OK, I’m grateful for the expertise we have around this table. I think that’s probably 
good for a committee vote. Let’s start with our Head of Infrastructure : yes or no?
Head of Infrastructure:
Yes .
Chief Investment Officer:
How about our Head of Risk ?
Head of Risk:
I have my doubts, but because it is a $100 million investment on AUM of $50 billion, 
we’ll give it a shot. I’ll say “yes. ”
Chief Investment Officer:
We have to take a little bit of risk, after all.
Head of PE , how about you?
Head of PE:
Before we ultimately pull the trigger, we should take another look at our other invest -
ments and similar memos to see if they’re related to tourism and it would mean too 
much correlation. Besides that, I’m a “yes. ”
Chief Investment Officer:
OK. Head of Equities ?
Head of Equities:
Yes from me as well. Given the size of the investment, I think it’s worth taking the risk.
Chief Investment Officer:
And I vote “yes. ”
As a sovereign wealth fund, beyond our responsibility to manage risks and returns 
well, we want to give back, and where our participation helps nations develop, we feel 
a responsibility there as well.
Voting on Private Equity Investment
Chief Investment Officer:
All right, very good. Let’s move on to our direct private equity investment in ABC. 
Head of PE , what say you?
Head of PE:
I’m in. Yes.
Chief Investment Officer:
Very good. How about you, Head of Equities ?
Head of Equities:
I’m supportive of this. For one thing, it presents much less risk than the airport in 
Sunnyland. Yes.
Chief Investment Officer:
OK. And our resident infrastructure expert, what say you?
Case Study 495
Head of Infrastructure:
Well, you might expect me to disagree with Head of Equities  in terms of the risk—we 
have a minority position, for one thing. But the investment is small, so I’m fine. Yes.
Chief Investment Officer:
OK. And finally, Head of Risk ?
Head of Risk:
Head of PE  made some very good points. It is indeed a simple investment to understand 
and a chance to gain some experience in direct investment. Even if it doesn’t work out 
financially, there’s upside to building our experience and to having a positive impact 
on the wider community, to name but two areas of non-financial return. Yes from me.
Chief Investment Officer:
OK, we have two investments that I’m excited to proceed with. I’d like Head of 
Infrastructure  and Head of PE  to run with those and keep us posted, and now it’s 
time—
Head of PE:
—To fight for the open board seat!
Head of Risk:
Sounds fun, but actually, let’s do this the old-fashioned way by filling the other board 
seat on the basis of experience?
Head of PE:
One free Mango Special to our wise, risk-averse colleague!
Chief Investment Officer:
And with that, we’ll see everyone for the next investment committee meeting, in a 
month’s time.
—The End—
IN-TEXT QUESTIONS
Please respond to the following questions based on Investment Committee 
Meeting 1.0 .
1. The Head of Infrastructure identified a key risk to the Sunnyland 
airport investment. Explain what analysis could be shared with you to 
increase your confidence that the key risk is properly managed prior to 
making the investment in the Sunnyland airport. 
2. Explain how the upcoming election most likely exposes the R-SWF’s 
investment in ABC to financial risk. Discuss whether or not you 
believe the Head of PE’s approach to managing this particular risk is 
sufficient.
Guideline Answers:
1. During the investment committee meeting, the Head of Infrastructure 
identified traffic as the key risk to the Sunnyland airport investment. 
The island might not draw an increased number of tourists simply 
because the airport can accommodate larger planes and more passen -
gers. Although the Head of Infrastructure alluded to the fact that he 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 496
has quantified the financial risk should the level of tourists not meet 
expectations after the completion of the new airport, I would like to 
review his scenario analysis to feel comfortable with his assumptions. 
Scenario analysis would be the best way to manage this financial risk 
prior to making the investment in Sunnyland.
2. I do not think the Head of PE’s approach to managing the financial 
risk due to the upcoming election is sufficient. My understanding is 
that the upcoming election will expose ABC to financial risk because 
the current government has imposed large tariffs on foreign compet -
itors that would like to export their products to Atsui. In the event a 
different political party, specifically one that opposes such tariffs, wins 
the upcoming election in Atsui, it could have a significant effect on the 
profitability of ABC because the company would need to compete for 
local customers.
Of course, a change in government is not something that ABC can control. 
Although I believe the steps the Head of PE has taken to manage this particular 
risk are good, including building rapport with the current government, it is not 
clear to me that he has conducted a thorough analysis to illustrate the poten -
tial financial impact on ABC should the tariffs be reduced or eliminated after 
the upcoming election. This analysis should be done using scenario analysis. 
Despite this being a relatively small investment for R-SWF, the financial risk of 
a change in the tariff policy should be thoroughly modeled and assessed prior 
to making the investment.
R-SWF’S Investments: 2.0
Extension of Case Facts (2.0)
After Investment Committee Meeting 1.0, the investment committee of the sov -
ereign wealth fund of Ruritania, R-SWF, added two new significant investments to 
its portfolio. These investments were direct infrastructure and direct private equity 
investments—the investments in the airport in Sunnyland and the beverage manu -
facturer in Atsui, respectively.
 ■Three years have passed, and the investment committee of R-SWF has 
decided to conduct an investment review of the two projects.
 ■Note: The focus of the meeting is on the risks (current and potential) of 
the new investment proposals, not details on the financial performance of 
the investments. (An in-depth meeting on the financial performance of the 
investments was held in the previous month).
 ■All investment committee participants (and Level III candidates in the 
CFA Program) are provided with a background memo with the following 
information:
 ●Memo A: Update on R-SWF’s asset allocation and performance
 ●Memo B: Update on the direct infrastructure investment (airport expan -
sion in Sunnyland) and a list of risks for discussion
 ●Memo C: Provides details on the proposed direct private equity invest -
ment (investment in ABC) and a list of risks for discussion.
Case Study 497
INVESTMENT COMMITTEE MEETING MEMO 2.0
To: R-SWF Investment Committee Members
From: R-SWF Chief Investment Officer
Re: Investment Committee Meeting 2.0 Agenda
Distribution: Head of Risk, Head of PE, Head of Infrastructure, Head of 
Equities, and Junior Staff
Agenda
 ■Opening Remarks and Asset Allocation CIO—5 minutes
 ■Infrastructure Update CIO + Head of Infrastructure—5 minutes
 ■PE Update CIO + Head of PE—5 minutes
 ■Discussion of Risk—Infrastructure: Head of Infrastructure, Head of 
Risk, All—10 minutes
 ■Discussion of Risk—PE: Head of PE, Head of Risk, All—10 minutes
 ■Other Risks: Head of Equities + All—5–10 minutes
 ■Closing Remarks: CIO—5 minutes
Memo 2A: Asset Allocation and Performance
 ■Since its inception, R-SWF has built a diversified portfolio of invest -
ments. As of last month, the fund had AUM of $56 billion USD, with 
the fund outperforming its overall benchmark by 130 bps net of fees 
since inception. Of course, there have been short-term periods of 
underperformance as the fund pursued its long-term strategy.
 ■The asset allocation as of last month for the overall fund was as 
follows:
Alternatives
51%Equities-
Emerging/F rontier
22%
Equities-Developed
17%
Fixed Income
9%Cash
1%—Total Portf olio
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 498
 ■Asset allocation in percentages. Division of total portfolio with alter -
natives gaining major share of 51% followed by Equities emerging/
frontier, 17%, equities developed, 12%, Fixed income, 9%, and Cash, 
1%.
Asset allocation in percentages. Division of total portfolio with alter -
natives gaining major share of 51% followed by Equities emerging/
frontier, 17%, equities developed, 12%, Fixed income, 9%, and Cash, 
1%.
 ■R-SWF had approximately 51% of assets invested in alternative invest -
ments, consistent with its long-term objectives.
 ■Asset allocation was covered extensively in the prior month’s invest -
ment committee meeting, so today’s meeting will not provide any 
further breakdown.
 ■The investment committee will be discussing various points of view on 
risk aspects of the investments—including risk mitigation.
 ■The discussion will include “other risks” that were perhaps not covered 
well in the initial discussion. Discussion of environmental and social 
risks are challenging for long-term direct investing.
 ■Updates on the airport expansion in Sunnyland infrastructure invest -
ment are found in Memo 2B.
 ■Updates on the PE investment in ABC in Atsui are found in Memo 2C.
Memo 2B: Update on Infrastructure Investment in 
Sunnyland Airport
Investment Update
 ■Based on investment committee approval, the $100 million investment 
in Sunnyland has moved forward in accordance with agreed plans. 
This amount represents approximately 0.2% of total R-SWF assets.
 ■The Sunnyland government is happy with the progress of construction, 
which was completed recently. There was a delay in getting started, 
but that is Island life. Thankfully, there were no material cost overruns 
on the project.
 ■The new terminal is beautifully built and will be a great addition to the 
island nation as it further develops its tourism capabilities.
 ■We expect a grand opening of the new terminal in September, in time 
for the busy fall season. Tourist season is primarily from October 
through May, with the summer months being very hot (around 40°C) 
and humid.
 ■There are rumors that Airport Operating Group (AOG) is looking to 
renegotiate its contract for a higher fixed fee.
 ■One of the advantages of Sunnyland as a tourist attraction is its beau -
tiful beaches with easy access to the airport, with the new runway, 
only 1 km from the sea, providing spectacular views.
 ■However, climate change has led to rising seas and more frequent 
storms. Storms are common in island nations; however, the rising seas 
are of concern.
 ■In addition, hotter temperatures are of additional concern. A few years 
ago, the tourist season was September through June, with only July 
and August being “too hot. ” However, in May this year, daytime highs 
Case Study 499
were frequently 42°C or higher. There is a risk that the hotter tempera -
tures lasting longer in the year will reduce tourism (and revenues for 
the airport project).
 ■Although this is a small investment in total, there are some risks we 
should focus on in today’s discussion.
Risk Discussion: Infrastructure Investment
The following key risks are highlighted for discussion:
 ■Currency risk
 ■Expropriation risk by the Sunnyland government
 ■Risk that revenue from airport is less than expected
 ■Risk of project delays
 ■Risk of operating and maintenance costs being higher than projected
 ■Risk of default of AOG
 ■Risk that actual future (borrowing) interest rates will be higher than 
forecast
 ■Risk of underperformance regarding service quality–not meeting 
defined standards
 ■Other risks
Possible Mitigation of the Key Risks
 ■What should we do to mitigate the key risks?
 ■What should be our priorities? Action plan?
Memo 2C: Update on PE Investment in Atsui Beverage 
Company
Investment Update
 ■Based on investment committee approval, the $25 million investment 
in ABC has moved forward in accordance with agreed plans. This 
amount represents approximately 0.05% of total R-SWF assets.
 ■The modernization of the ABC plant went well, and the product 
expansion is starting to take shape. However, there several key updates 
that are unfortunately negative:
 ●Atsui and surrounding nations went into a recession last year. 
Furthermore, a currency devaluation is anticipated. Beverages are 
considered a luxury item in Atsui.
 ●A new government was elected in Atsui last year and took office in 
January. One of the first orders of business was to reduce tariffs on 
imported beverages from a 100% tariff to a 20% tariff. This change 
hurts our cost advantage over foreign brands. It is rumored that 
tariffs were reduced because Atsui wants to gain favor with foreign 
governments for potential loans.
 ●Because the modern equipment will improve productivity, the 
original plan was to reduce headcount by 40%. In addition, due 
to slowing sales, management wanted to reduce staff by a total of 
50%. However, labor laws are strict in Atsui. In order to terminate 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 500
the employment of an Atsui citizen, significant notice (two years) 
is required. Plus, there is reputational risk for R-SWF for firing 
factory employees in a frontier market during a recession.
 ●In order to make up for lower profits (due to the above reasons), 
plant management has started to cut corners to save on costs. 
Unfortunately, one way to do this was to dump waste into the 
nearby river rather than transport the waste for proper treatment. 
Although the waste is not toxic, it is starting to spoil the lovely 
fishing spot near the factory.
 ●Another way ABC has tried to cut costs is by reducing employee 
breaks from one hour to 30 minutes and removing soap from the 
restrooms, requesting that employees bring their own.
 ■Although this is a small investment in total, there are some risks we 
should focus on in today’s discussion.
Risk Discussion: Private Equity Investment
The following key risks are highlighted for discussion:
 ■Currency risk
 ■Expropriation risk by the Atsui government
 ■Quality control issues
 ■Challenges with local management (don’t have a majority stake)
 ■Competitor pressure
 ■Growing trend of health foods that would result in avoidance of many 
carbonated beverages
 ■Elimination of tariffs protecting ABC from foreign-owned 
manufacturers
 ■Other risks
Possible Mitigation of the Key Risks
 ■What should we do to mitigate these risks?
 ■What should be our priorities? Action plan?
IN-TEXT QUESTIONS
Please respond to the following questions based on Investment Committee 
Memo 2.0 .
3. The investment committee has identified several new risks that were 
not previously discussed (before Memos 2B and 2C). The CIO asks 
you to recommend how R-SWF can manage each of the following 
risks:
a. Risk of actual future (borrowing) interest rates will be higher than 
forecast (Memo 2B)
b. Growing trend of health foods that would result in avoidance of 
many carbonated beverages (Memo 2C)
Case Study 501
Guideline Answers:
4a: R-SWF can manage the risk that actual future (borrowing) interest 
rates will be higher than forecast by hedging its interest rate exposure for 
the Sunnyland airport project.
4b: R-SWF can manage the risk of carbonated beverages falling out of 
favor due to an increasing preference for health foods by working to 
develop new healthy alternatives to carbonated, presumably sugar-filled 
drinks. As the production facility expands its ability to produce product, 
ABC could focus its new product development on healthy alternatives. 
The company can leverage its experience producing such beverages given 
the success of its natural mango drink in order to differentiate itself and 
increase market share.
Investment Committee Meeting 2.0
Participants
Chief Investment Officer (CIO)
Head of Infrastructure
Head of PE
Head of Risk
Head of Equities
Analysts [no speaking role]
Chief Investment Officer:
Good morning, everyone, and welcome to today’s investment committee meeting of 
the sovereign wealth fund of the Republic of Ruritania. We’re grateful for the oppor -
tunity to serve our constituents.
During last month’s committee meeting, we reviewed the financial statements of 
the two projects in question—the airport in Sunnyland and the beverage manufac -
turer in Atsui. Our Head of PE  provided the Mango Specials, so thank you for that!
It’s been three years—wow, time really flies—since we unanimously approved 
proceeding with both investments. We’ll go through some updates, but today’s focus 
is risks and sensible mitigation measures.
First, though, the bigger picture: In those three years, AUM have grown by $6 billion. 
We’re still outperforming our overall benchmark, but our outperformance has been 
dulled by difficulties with some assets, primarily real estate, because commercial real 
estate has underperformed. So that’s hurt us a little bit, but as ever, we are long-term 
investors, and we may reap the benefits of those investments yet.
As we discuss risk mitigation, let’s consider environmental and social risks. The 
greater pressure we’ve put on ourselves to invest responsibly and sustainably is matched 
by increased scrutiny from outside observers.
Whether we’ve decided to make an exit on our own or because of outside pressure, 
our rather long-term horizon doesn’t make it any easier for us to step away from an 
investment when the time comes. As a contrast, our Head of Equities  was telling 
me before the meeting started that he wasn’t too happy about how much one of his 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 502
portfolio companies was polluting, and so he just went ahead and sold the position. 
It was a liquid investment in a public market, and he was done within the hour. That’s 
a contrast we have to keep in mind.
Allow me to read this comment about ABC from the minutes of the last meeting, 
as a sort of touchstone for us today: “This is a rather small investment, of $25 million, 
but even a small investment can have an outsized negative impact on us if we don’t 
manage the risk properly. ”
But let’s begin with Sunnyland airport. Head of Infrastructure , why don’t you 
start us off?
Head of Infrastructure:
Thanks, CIO .
The good news is that the new terminal is pretty much complete and in line with 
specifications. We received some good reviews, both from locals and the international 
trade press. The downside is delays: At the outset, we expected a two-year construction 
program, but we’re now well into the third year, unfortunately. There were noticeable 
cost overruns, and those were borne by the contractor, according to the contract, but 
there are some delay penalties that have yet to be settled.
The government, the contractor, and ourselves and AOG as investors—we’re in 
discussions about these penalties, and the contractors are pointing to variations they 
say arose from our side. What they’re calling “variations” we see as necessary design 
thinking for optimizing the commerciality of the retail outlets. The “variations” were 
pretty minimal, so let’s see where our discussions end up. And some further disagree -
ments center around the offices of customs and immigration within the terminal, 
which the contractor is laying at the foot of the government.
We should also highlight that as we’re nearing the startup of terminal operations, 
the operator, AOG, has started complaining that the costs of training local staff are 
higher than expected. They haven’t said anything formally yet, but I imagine they’ll 
want to renegotiate their fixed-fee contract—nothing too serious.
Meanwhile, the grand opening of the terminal is a month away, in late August. It 
should be a good, high-profile event, and we should make a good showing. At least 
four Ruritania representatives, I think.
And then always swirling around our work is the focus of the press on the envi -
ronmental movement and climate change, so we need to think about the impact on 
tourism. The main tourist season is September through June, historically, but it’s just 
getting too hot, and so really the prime window for visitors will narrow to October 
through May.
The debate in the local press is frequently about the impact of so many tourists 
flying to Sunnyland, and AOG is in dialogue with the airlines about it. We have yet 
to see how that plays out in terms of impact on the airport operations down the road, 
but at the grand opening, we’ll be able to celebrate the start of the upcoming season 
in September; bookings are in line with optimistic projections for the first year with 
the new terminal and runway.
Chief Investment Officer:
OK, thank you for that update.
And what can we say about ABC in Atsui?
Head of PE:
So, there are positives and negatives. A big positive is that this has been a fantastic 
learning experience for our direct investment program. But there’s been a currency 
devaluation, and you could argue it’s going to get worse because of the recession—the 
recession that started last year and that you all know so well because we’re in the 
middle of it.
Case Study 503
Still, is that good or bad? We do sell to tourists who bring their own currency, 
and we’ve got a lot of flexibility to shift our pricing so we can keep prices where they 
should be relative to our costs, which is positive.
But following the recent election, the new administration is talking about dropping 
all sorts of import tariffs, including the ones on food and drink. They’ve basically said, 
“For sure, we’re going to cut them from 100% to 20%. ”
Obviously, this hurts our cost advantage over foreign brands, and the challenge 
here is that the new government wants to win favor with foreign governments before 
asking them for big loans, so the issue is about more than just carbonated drinks.
Chief Investment Officer:
There’s a rumor that the new president likes Pepsi, so it’s almost as if she doesn’t want 
to pay double for a can, but 20% more is OK.
Head of PE:
ABC’s new modernized equipment is ready to go, but here’s the problem: Management 
is now saying they want to reduce headcount by 50%, instead of just 40%, because of 
the slowing sales. But labor laws in Atsui are strict, and to let someone go, you usually 
have to give as much as two years’ notice.
Head of Risk:
Two years?
Head of PE:
Yeah, and the other issue is that for us as a sovereign wealth fund, there’s reputational 
risk. Flying in from world cities and firing factory employees in frontier markets mean 
bad publicity, especially in Atsui and especially during the recession.
And here’s another thing: In order to make up for lower profits, management has 
started cutting corners. They’re dumping waste in the nearby river rather than paying 
to transport it to the treatment site. Do you remember how the plant is right next 
to the river and the employees fish in it during lunch? It’s spoiling the fishing spot. 
This is a problem. And it gets worse: Scientists are saying that the plant site and the 
river overlap with the range of a rare reptile that is found here and only one other 
place on earth. So our site has attracted the attention of people with no interest in 
soda or mangoes.
Head of Risk:
This is a problem.
Head of PE:
Now here’s another thing: ABC has tried to cut costs by reducing employee breaks 
from an hour to 30 minutes and—this is probably a little granular for our meeting, 
but risks are risks, they have removed soap from the restrooms! Everyone has to bring 
their own soap now.
Now, I know we’re a $50 billion sovereign wealth fund—
Chief Investment Officer:
—$56 billion.
Head of PE:
I know we’re a $56 billion sovereign wealth fund, and here we are talking about 
removing soap from a few bathrooms in the tropics where we have a $25 million 
direct investment, but stuff like this can have a reputational impact.
Head of Risk:
Agreed.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 504
Chief Investment Officer:
Our focus right now is risk, and we should be talking about this. We haven’t really 
faced any of these health and safety or social issues before at the individual investment 
level, and it’s a learning opportunity as we expand our direct investing program. Head 
of PE , when you went to the restroom and found out there was no soap, you had to 
borrow some from the plant manager. Is that right? Did he give it to you for free, or 
did he charge you?
Head of PE:
He wanted to charge me, but I didn’t need any soap because I had hand sanitizer 
with me. I got used to carrying hand sanitizer around with me everywhere back in 
the coronavirus days, so now I just do that when I’m in Atsui.
Chief Investment Officer:
OK, then let’s discuss infrastructure.
Three years ago when we approved this investment, we talked potential risks, 
including climate, and we were comfortable with the position that the threat of rising 
seas was well into the future. We may have to re-evaluate that position.
Head of Risk:
Despite our comfort then, the fact is that storms have become more frequent and the 
sea level has risen measurably—in three short years.
Head of Infrastructure:
The lenders have also raised this point, as has our in-country political adviser. I still don’t 
see any impact in the immediate term. If you remember three years ago, much of our 
comfort came from the environmental-impact assessments, which were required and 
were factored into the design. What has been constructed can deal with it sufficiently.
The bigger worry is the force of an unanticipated and rare storm that compounds 
the impact of some already bad flooding. Originally, the engineers planned for a 
once-in-50-years or once-in-100-years scenario, and it may be that the risk of those 
events has increased.
There’s a discussion to be had with the government about architectural solutions—
maybe some proper flood barriers. As for the cost of them, if they’ll even work, and 
whose responsibility that is—those issues are unclear. It’s not in anybody’s interest 
for the airport to shut down.
Head of Equities:
My experience engaging with large public companies on climate risk tells me that 
a tiny island like Sunnyland can’t have any meaningful impact on a global scale and 
hence they must focus on adaptation rather than worry too much about mitigation. 
Head of Infrastructure  points to one of the more logical solutions: some sort of 
storm-surge barrier like the Netherlands has relied on for years.
As for who’s going to pay for it, let’s think beyond our own project for a min -
ute. Rising seas aren’t just going to have an impact on the airport; every five-star, 
beach-facing property will feel it too. The prime hotels feel it, and eventually the 
whole tourist ecosystem feels it, and with the country so dependent on tourism, my 
view is that this has to be a government-driven initiative. And a storm-surge barrier 
that successfully avoids damaging floods will be important enough to private inter -
ests, such as real estate and other infrastructure investors, that they’ll form part of 
the funding circle.
Head of Infrastructure:
I think that’s right. It’s a question for the whole economy and for the government. 
Serious talks are taking place in Sunnyland about a new tax to cover the costs, a sort 
of climate tax that would go to a host of worsening climate issues.
Case Study 505
How the authorities end up structuring that tax will inform whether we can avoid it.
Chief Investment Officer:
Understood, but as a sovereign institution, even if we could avoid such a tax to protect 
our investment value, from a reputational perspective, we should think twice.
Head of PE:
Head of Infrastructure  said that AOG might be asking for a higher fixed fee to operate 
the new terminal. I’m not sure if this is a question for this point in the meeting, but 
is there anything we can do to proactively protect ourselves against a higher contract 
fee in the event AOG gets its renegotiation?
Head of Infrastructure:
We all signed a well-structured agreement, and that affords us some decent protection 
against any meddling in the fee structure, though there are break clauses if anything 
gets too out of line. Still, there are incentives built into the concession agreement to 
make sure everyone wins to a greater or lesser extent when traffic goes up.
Equally, we don’t want a disgruntled operator. Happy employees, happy travelers, 
better experience, more traffic.
We haven’t been formally approached about this, but let’s not dismiss it out of 
hand just because we have a contract we can hide behind. AOG is a strong global 
operator. If they did activate a break clause in two or three years’ time, that lands 
us with a responsibility we really don’t want, which is finding a new operator. We’re 
still satisfied with their cooperation. I recommend seeing how talks over the delays 
play out, and if we find that the government is liable for the delay, we’ll request an 
extension to the concession and then sit down with AOG to positively collaborate on 
retooling the whole picture.
Chief Investment Officer:
OK, we’ve covered the environmental and reputational risks, the climate risk, and the 
AOG item as well. Are there any other risks we should examine at this point?
Head of Risk:
That covers the important ones. Currency risk and the risk of further delays are less 
of a concern. With climate change, we can’t solve  it; as Head of Equities  insists, we 
have to adapt. It affects the entire nation, so hopefully the government will step in.
And I reinforce the idea of positive negotiations with AOG. We want a happy 
operator.
Chief Investment Officer:
Right. OK, very good.
Head of Risk , it looks like something is still on your mind.
Head of Risk:
Thanks for noticing. A little more scrutiny of ABC is warranted. I acknowledge its 
importance for boosting our direct investment know-how. It’s been a great learning 
experience for Head of PE  and his team, and it’s a very small investment. Even if we 
lose money, it’s not going to move the needle for our fund, but—and this is a substantial 
“but”—the reputational risk is a big concern.
We don’t want to end up in the newspaper firing people during a recession, pol -
luting the river, threatening endangered species, and being rather petty about soap.
Head of Infrastructure:
True on all counts.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 506
Head of Risk:
Ladies and gentlemen, the writing is on the wall. I propose we exit this investment 
as soon as possible, if we can. Maybe we can’t, and if that’s the case, I would remain 
very concerned.
Head of PE:
No, I’m happy you mentioned it, and it’s good that it’s all coming out in this room. 
Let me tell you how we see things.
Before we jumped into this as one of our first direct investments, we co-invested 
and participated in many private equity funds that invest in all kinds of things, 
including special situations and distressed investments, and we’ve always gone in with 
third-party experts or used our own experts. Just because things get a little dicey, it 
doesn’t mean we exit.
When we started, ABC was a conventional, if small, investment. If that’s changed 
and it now is a problem business, we’ve got a team whose job it is to make lemonade 
out of lemons, so let’s think about passing ABC over to the distressed-asset team 
before it becomes properly distressed. I’m not saying we keep it or some other team 
takes it. I’m saying let’s at least see if it’s a better fit for someone else.
What if we keep going? We’ve got risks around firing employees, dumping waste in 
the river, and pettiness around soap. And we’re shifting our mindset, and the challenge 
is less about the return and more about the reputational risk.
So we really need to figure out: Can we change how this business functions to 
manage that risk? We have a 35% interest, we know that management has skin in 
the game. But in what game? With management incentivized to improve the bottom 
line, we’re motivating them to cut employees instead of keeping employees happy 
and avoiding resentment.
So we’re asking ourselves a new question: How do we motivate management to keep 
people inside and outside the plant happy? We have two board seats, and investing 
more money in modernization seems to make less sense now.
And we’ve got employees now who don’t have much to do, but they’re collecting a 
salary, so why would they leave? And if we can’t fire them, it’s an issue. Maybe we pay 
them a percentage—say, half their regular salary—while offering them good training 
and assistance for eight months to find another job. At the same time, we’d convince 
management to shift to a less profit-driven focus.
I don’t know if any of that will work. Maybe we should have divested earlier, but 
that’s our thinking if we keep holding on.
Head of Equities:
And what about the toxic stuff being released into the river?
Head of PE:
It’s actually not toxic, technically, but we don’t even want to be talking about whether 
it’s toxic or not toxic. Ending that practice is an important piece of our talks with 
management, and so is removing incentives to cut corners.
Can we fundamentally change the way things are going? If we can’t, then maybe 
this is an investment for someone else. Or perhaps we sell our 35% stake back to 
management?
Chief Investment Officer:
Thanks, Head of PE . We talked about this being a learning experience. We also talked 
about it displaying aspects of impact investment. Maybe part of the value is in educa -
tion. In some less developed areas, they think it’s maybe not a big deal to throw things 
into the river. Can we inform their thinking with the idea that wanting a beautiful 
river for fishing and enjoyment is a virtue and that it’s not really that hard to dispose 
of waste properly? What can we intelligently say about impact?
Case Study 507
Head of Equities:
This line of thinking makes sense to me. Our experience in other developing nations 
as well as developed nations tells us that you’ll save some costs in the short term with 
actions like dumping waste directly into water bodies, but in the long run, regulations 
catch up to you and the cost of pre-treatment or appropriate handling of waste is 
much lower than the penalties you get for taking such shortcuts.
If we decide to stay, we have to paint the picture for management that there’s a fatal 
flaw in our approach at the moment. Public perception is one issue, but eventually 
regulations will be introduced with penalties and obligations to clean up the river.
If we do try to salvage the situation and continue with our investment, there’s a path 
that involves the government. Our pitch should be that if there are legal roadblocks 
for cutting 50% of the jobs, you might be putting 100% of the jobs at risk because the 
company won’t survive if tariffs are reduced to 20%. The government doesn’t want 
the factory to shut down because of its rigid labor laws, so there may well be room 
for a more, let’s say, negotiated conclusion.
It’s worth exploring, again, in consultation with the local management.
Chief Investment Officer:
Lobbying the government, reframing management’s incentives—these are interesting 
ways to pivot. We should also consider as a committee the extent to which we want 
to maintain our direct investing/private equity approach or whether there is wisdom 
in recasting our work as more of an impact program. The committee’s analysis has 
highlighted the difficulties faced by a sovereign wealth fund in cutting staff. It ends 
up being a headline risk.
The conventional private equity houses can more easily cut jobs for purely financial 
reasons. However, as a sovereign wealth fund, it is more complicated for us. Imagine 
the headline: “Government of Ruritania Cuts Jobs in XYZ during a Recession. ”
Head of Infrastructure:
It’s not a good look.
Chief Investment Officer:
It’s not a good look. Right.
Head of Risk:
From my point of view, we’ve covered the main risks for ABC. I like the sequence: We 
engage with management to change the mindset, and we lobby government on how a 
two-year notice period and similar restrictions could jeopardize the whole business. 
We give it another year, and if we’re not making progress, we look for an exit option, 
maybe handing things over to a team that is comfortable with these thorny issues.
Chief Investment Officer:
Well summarized. I’m grateful for the focus we are putting on the risks here.
And as for Sunnyland?
Head of Equities:
I’d submit to the team that while the world’s major governments have started  taking 
action on climate change, we’re not going to “fix” these problems easily so the planet 
can just go back to the way it was 30 years ago. The impact will intensify, and we 
have to adapt.
In my mind, the focus should be on liaising with the government. They will have 
to drive things because of the scale of the investment required—
Chief Investment Officer:
—And because of how long term the investment horizon is.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 508
Team, this is the sort of experienced scrutiny of risk we needed, so thank you very 
much. This was a highly worthwhile meeting, and let’s keep a keen focus on the risks.
—The End—
IN-TEXT QUESTIONS
Please answer the following question based on Investment Committee Meeting 
2.0.
1. In the template provided, state the primary environmental risk that 
has been identified by R-SWF’s investment committee for each invest -
ment. Recommend how each risk can be managed in the future.
 
InvestmentPrimary Environmental 
RiskRisk Management 
Recommendation
Sunnyland 
Airport   
Atsui Beverage 
Company   
 
2. Identify one significant social risk that both investments have in 
common and that was not originally identified by the investment 
committee. Discuss whether or not this risk is easily managed once 
recognized.
Guideline Answers
1. In the template provided, state the primary environmental risk that 
has been identified by R-SWF’s investment committee for each invest -
ment. Recommend how each risk can be managed in the future.
Case Study 509
 
InvestmentPrimary Environmental 
Risk Risk Management Recommendation
Sunnyland Airport Climate change due to rising 
sea levelsGiven the uncertainty around the precise timing and magni -
tude of the impact of climate change and rising sea levels spe -
cifically, R-SWF should use climate-related scenario analysis to 
better understand how climate change will affect its investment 
in Sunnyland. In addition, since R-SWF cannot mitigate climate 
change, it must focus on adaptation strategies. In this case, a 
strategy to provide protection for the airport against a storm surge 
or higher sea levels is the most realistic option. An adaptation 
strategy is consistent with the development mandate of R-SWF’s 
investment in Sunnyland.
Atsui Beverage Company Waste management due to 
dumping waste into riverR-SWF must find a way to persuade the board and local manage -
ment to stop dumping waste in the river in an effort to pursue 
sustainable development and a “just” transition. Although it might 
be a cost savings in the short run, in the long run, regulations will 
catch up. Cleanup of improperly disposed waste is far more costly 
than appropriately disposing of waste up front. One of the ways 
to encourage prioritization of protecting the river is to educate 
the local community about the importance of a healthy river. 
Community education, the pursuit of sustainable development, and 
a “just” transition are consistent with the impact investing element 
of this investment for R-SWF.
 
2. Reputational risk is very significant in the case of each investment and 
can have an outsized effect on the performance of the investments. 
Social issues, such as reputational risk, are generally quite difficult to 
manage even once identified and understood because they are rel -
atively challenging to quantify and integrate into financial models. 
Furthermore, best practices include considering the interests of all the 
stakeholders involved, which is not easy.
In Sunnyland, R-SWF must contribute to any effort to raise funds to implement 
protection against rising seas. This project will likely be expensive. However, it is 
not in R-SWF’s best interest to appear to be avoiding contributing to the project 
to accommodate climate change. Doing so could significantly damage R-SWF’s 
reputation in Sunnyland and beyond given the international attention paid to 
the construction of the new airport. In theory, reputational risk in this case is 
relatively simple to manage in that R-SWF simply needs to be a contributor to 
the project and overall community by supporting efforts to adapt to climate 
change so as to not destroy Sunnyland’s tourism industry. However, execution 
of such a strategy to mitigate R-SWF’s reputational risk in Sunnyland will need 
to be closely monitored in order to effectively execute it. Managing this type 
of risk is not easy.
Reputational risk is also very significant in the case of ABC because of two 
major social issues: (1) occupational health and safety and (2) labor standards. 
Each of these issues could significantly damage R-SWF’s reputation. Removing 
hand soap from the restrooms is an occupational health and safety issue that 
could cause reputational damage. Shortening employee breaks and firing people 
during a recession are social issues related to labor standards.
These types of choices indicate that local management is more concerned 
about profitability than reputational risk. In order to manage its reputational risk, 
R-SWF needs to persuade the board to adjust its incentive structure in order to 
encourage local management to reverse course on these short-sighted, destructive 
social issues, even if it is expensive. R-SWF does not want to be perceived as an 
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 510
investor that exploits its labor force. Soap should be provided for employees, 
breaks should be reasonable in length, and rather than firing employees, which 
can’t be effectively executed because of the strict labor laws, ABC should focus 
on retraining employees for the future of the business. This is a complicated, 
multifaceted course especially as a minority owner. It isn’t easily implemented 
but can be done. Any changes will need to be monitored to ensure they continue 
and have the desired outcome—a sustainable and mutually beneficial long-term 
relationship with the local community.
R-SWF’S Investments: 3.0
Second Extension of Case Facts (3.0)
You left R-SWF at the end of Year 3 and took a position as a Senior Risk Consultant 
at Kiken Consulting, a risk consulting firm.
In the summer of Year 5, you are reading the newspaper and notice some com -
mentary on two of the R-SWF investments you had been involved with. You read the 
following excerpts with nostalgic interest.
Update on Infrastructure Investment
 ■The infrastructure investment continues to perform poorly because of a 
combination of the following:
 ●lower revenue (fewer tourists) vs. forecast (50% lower than base case)
 ●higher costs (mitigating flood damage) vs. forecast (50% higher than base 
case)
 ■The medium- and long-term forecast on this investment does not look 
promising.
Update on PE Investment
 ■The PE team was able to avoid a diplomatic crisis and reputational risk 
damage by finding a buyer for the 35% stake. They sold the full position at 
$27 million.
 ■The stake was sold to an international beverage company that had been 
exporting to Atsui. The company’s sales had been adversely affected by a 
weaker Atsui currency. Thus, producing locally is advantageous because it 
provides a natural foreign exchange hedge.
You set the newspaper down and start thinking about Sunnyland and Atsui when your 
boss suddenly interrupts you with the following news:
Kiken Consulting has a new client! R-SWF has hired the firm for a risk 
analysis project. Because you have prior knowledge on R-SWF’s approach, 
your boss has assigned you to the project with a lead role. You are expected 
to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of R-SWF’s enterprise risk man -
agement system and to make recommendations for improvements.
Case Study 511
IN-TEXT QUESTION
Please respond to the following question.
1. Provide key facts/inputs from the R-SWF case, use them to evaluate 
the strengths and weaknesses of R-SWF’s enterprise risk management 
processes, and make recommendations for improvements.
Guideline Answer
1. One of the main strengths of R-SWF’s risk management process is that 
R-SWF dedicated an entire internal investment committee meeting 
to identifying and discussing the potential risks of two relatively small 
investment opportunities. Ample time was taken to allow senior man -
agement of R-SWF to express their concerns and discuss mitigation 
strategies to reduce potential risks. The investment committee was 
able to identify various potential risk factors, and senior management 
voted on both investment opportunities.
One of the weaknesses of R-SWF’s risk management process is that too little 
effort was made in trying to quantify the various risks and agreeing on specific 
actions that could be taken if some of those risk materialized. The team, with 
the help of the Head of Risk, could have done a better job at performing sce -
nario analysis for both investments and presented a base case, an optimistic 
case, and a pessimistic case. Although the team identified and discussed several 
risk factors, they should have put together an action plan for risk mitigation 
and potential hedging tools prior to making the investments. This action plan 
would be conditional on certain bad outcomes materializing. Finally, since both 
investments were quite small in the overall scheme and had limited financial 
and liquidity risk implications for the fund, more consideration could have been 
given to identifying potential reputational risks and ESG.
Learning Module 7 Case Study in Portfolio Management: Institutional (SWF) 512
REFERENCES
Geltner, D. 1993. “Estimating Market Values from Appraised Values without Assuming an 
Efficient Market. ” Journal of Real Estate Research  8:325–45.
Getmansky, M., A. W. Lo, and I. Makarov. 2004. “ An Econometric Model of Serial Correlation 
and Illiquidity in Hedge Fund Returns. ” Journal of Financial Economics  74:529–609. 10.1016/j.
jfineco.2004.04.001
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment. “New Study Estimates 
Global Warming of 2.5 Centigrade Degrees by 2100 Would Put at Risk Trillions of Dollars 
of World’s Financial Assets. ” Press release (4 April 2016). www  .lse .ac .uk/ GranthamInstitute / 
news/  us2 -5 -trillion  -of -the -worlds  -financial  -assets  -would  -be -at -risk  -from  -the -impacts  -of 
-climate  -change  -if -global  -mean  -surface  -temperature  -rises  -by -2 -5c.
IEA. 2020. “World Energy Outlook 2020” (October). www  .iea .org/  reports/  world  -energy  
-outlook  -2020 .
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2018. “Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 ºC” 
(6 October). www  .ipcc .ch/ sr15/  chapter/  spm .
Lo, Joe. 2020. “IEA Outlines How World Can Reach Net Zero Emissions by 2050. ” Climate 
Home News  (13 October). www  .climatechangenews  .com/  2020/  10/ 13/ iea -outlines  -world  -can  
-reach  -net -zero  -emissions  -2050 .
NASA. 2019. “NASA Global Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet. ” https://  climate  .nasa  
.gov/  vital  -signs/  global  -temperature .
Okunev, J., D. White. 2003. “Hedge Fund Risk Factors and Value at Risk of Credit Trading 
Strategies. ” Working paper, University of New South Wales. 10.2139/ssrn.460641
